IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
10 Part 1 - General 
1.1 Introduction 
This Code of Practice outlines Irish Water’s technical requirements for the design, 
construction and commissioning of Works (the Wastewater collection pipework element 
of the Water and Wastewater Services Infrastructure ) for housing and 
industrial/commercial Development s, which is to be vested by Irish Water. This Code of 
Practice  will be kept  under review and the latest edition is available on the Irish Water 
website, at www.water.ie /connections/ . The reader should ensure that they are using 
the most up to date version of this Code of Practice. 
It is important that the Developer consults with Irish Water on all technical matters 
regarding the provision of the Works  for proposed Developments as early as possible . 
This can be done by engaging in a Pre-Connection Enquiry process as outlined in the 
Irish Water Guide to Connect which is available on the Irish Water website, at 
www.water.ie /connections/ . 
Failure to conform to the Code of Practice may result in Irish Water declining to allow 
the Works to be connected to its Network and/or the refusal of Irish Water to vest or 
adopt the Works.   
This Code of Practice covers the provision by the Developer  of new Works  which are to 
be connected to the Irish Water Network  and should not be used as a guidance 
document for all Wastewater  related construction. In these cases the appropriate Irish 
Water technical standards  and guidance documents should be used.  
The Developer shall obtain all necessary Requisite Consents  and other permissions for 
the proposed Development, including the Works.  
It should be noted that this Code of Practice relates to Works with Sewer sizes of 
450mm diameter and below. Larger diameter Sewer sizes are outside the scope of this 
document.   
1.2 Statutory Relevance 
The Water Services Act 2007 is the primary legislation governing Water Services in 
Ireland. It is a broad ranging piece of legislation concerning the supply of water for both 
domestic and non-domestic use, and the collection and treatment of Wastewater .  
The Water Services Act 2013 provided for the establishment of Irish Water in March 
2013. It was established as a semi state company as a subsidiary of Bord Gais and 
subsequently under Ervia. The Water Services Act 2013 also gave Irish Water and the 
Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU) powers to prepare for the transition of 
Water Services from Local Authorities to Irish Water. Irish Water is responsible for the 
Water Services previously provided by 34 Local Authorities. The Water Services Act IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
11 2013 also provided for the commencement of the metering programme and the 
installation of meters on domestic connections .  
The Water Services Act (No2) 2013 was enacted in December 2013 and provided for 
the transfer of Water Services functions from the Local Authorities to Irish Water from 
January 1st 2014. The Water Service Act also provided for the transfer of assets and 
certain liabilities related to Water Services from Local Authorities to Irish Water.  
1.3 Options for Works Construction   
Various options will be available to the Developer  for the construction of the Works as 
follows:  
1.3.1 Developer  undertakes the design and construction of the  Works (Self-Lay 
Works ). or 
1.3.2 Developer  undertakes design of the Works and subsequently an Irish Water 
contractor undertake s its construction  (Irish Water Lay), 
This Code of Practice deals with the provision by the Developer of the Works 
which are to be connected to the Irish Water Network. 
Note:  The Developer  shall provide separate Wastewater and Storm Water drainage 
systems for any new Development s in both greenfield and brownfield sites. Irish Water 
does not  have responsibility for Storm Water Sewers . These Storm Water Sewers  are 
the responsibility of the Lo cal Authority. It is Irish Water’s policy not to accept Surface 
Water or Storm Water runoff into its Network.  
1.4 Connection Procedure 
The steps that Irish Water will utilise for the Works comprises: 
1.4.1 Pre-Connection Enquiry (Optional ) (This is mandatory for Developments that 
avail of  the Planning and Development (Strategic Housing Development) 
Regulations 2017 (SI 271 of 2017) process ). 
1.4.2 Design Submission.  
1.4.3 Connection Application.  
1.4.4 Connection Offer (followed by acceptance and payment). 
1.4.5 Construction Stage (including Irish Water supervision, inspection, etc.). 
1.4.6 Commissioning Stage (including infrastructure documentation inspection, 
etc.). 
1.4.7 Connection of infrastructure to Irish Water asset (on issue of a Conformance 
Certificate). 
1.4.8 Vesting. 
1.4.9 Defects Liability Stage. 
1.4.10 Completion (on issue of a Completion Certificate). IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
12 
 The Pre Connection Enquiry and Connection Application Stages are outlined in greater 
detail in the Irish Water Guide s to Connect which are available on the Irish Water 
website, at www.water.ie /connections . Specific information is required in a Design 
Submission  in advance of the submission of the Connection Application as outlined in 
Section 2. 3 and Section 2.4  below. A Connection Agreement is required in all cases 
before Irish Water will provide a connection to  its Network s. 
 
1.5 Types of Sew age Collection Systems  
 
Single Premises s ervice connections extend from a Sewer  to connect to  the Premises  
Pipework and they collect the Wastewater  discharges  from Premises .  
 
Drains provide for the collection of Wastewater from toilets, baths, wash -hand basins, 
showers, utility rooms including washing machines, dishwashers and from kitchens 
utilities in domestic properties. Drains also collect domestic quality wastewater and 
trade effluent from commercial properties. Drains are connected to the Works  at the 
Boundary of the Premises.  
 
In some instances, due to the topography of the area served, the Works  may contain 
pumping s tations(s). In these instances, the Wastewater  is collected  at these low points 
and it is lifted by pumping and conveyed through a Rising Main  to Gravity Sewer s 
discharging  to the point of treatment.    
 
It is Irish Water’s policy to minimise Storm Water  inputs to Combined Sewer and to 
restrict  new Storm Water  inputs to  Sewers . Many Combined Sewer s have C ombined 
Sewer O verflow s (CSO) that allow for the release of combined Storm Water and 
Wastewater in times of heavy rainfall .  
 
Storm Water  Sewers  carry only runoff from roofs, paved surfaces, roadways, etc. These 
flows are discharged without treatment to  watercourses or land drainage systems . It is 
not permitted to discharge Wastewater  to a Sewer  designated as a Storm Water  Sewer  
Network . Irish Water does not have responsibility for Storm Water  Sewers . 
 
Storm W ater Sewer  systems are outside the scope of this document and should be 
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the relevant Local Authority  or 
Roads Authority .  
 
Watercourses or land drainage systems  are not permitted to be directly or indirectly 
connected to the Irish Water Network . Satisfactory and separate arrangements should 
be agreed with the relevant Local Authority  or Road Authority .   
 
Note:  The Developer  shall provide separate Wastewater and Storm Water drainage 
systems for any new Development s in both greenfield and brownfield sites. Irish Water 
does not  have responsibility for St orm Water drainage systems. Surface Water or 
Storm Water drainage systems a re the responsibility of the Local Authority. It is Irish 
Water’s policy not to accept Storm Water runoff into its Network.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
13 
  
The reduction of Storm W ater runoff arising within new Developments and discharging 
to the storm water sewer network or to existing watercourses may be required by a 
Local Authority. This reduction can be achieved using Sustainable Urban Drainage 
Systems (SUDS). This will be a matter for the Developer  to design  and put in place in 
consultation with the relevant Local Authority. A suitable Sustainable Urban Drainage 
System (SUDS) may be required within the Development  to the requirements of the 
Local Authority for the area. The SUDS can be undertaken to the requi rements outlined 
in the Greater Dublin Region Strategic Drainage Study (GDSDS) Report or any other 
Design Guidance Document for SUDS considered appropriate for the location of the 
Development .  
   
In very exceptional circumstances, where there is no other outlet for storm water and 
the Developer  can prove to Irish Water that they have exhausted all other options, 
discharge of storm water to a combined sewer may be allowed, subject to the approval 
of Irish Water. W here wastewater and storm water sewer system s from the new 
Development  area are allowed by Irish Water to be connected to an existing Irish Water 
combined sewer, the new wastewater sewer and storm sewer systems shall be 
separated within the Development  and may only be connected together immediately 
prior to the Connection Point to the existing Irish Water Network. Irish Water, in this 
instance, shall also be consulted on the design of the Sustainable Urban Drainage 
System (SUDS) for the storm sewer netw ork and its recommendations in relation to the 
acceptance levels of additional storm water to its sewer network shall be taken into 
account.  
 
In these exceptional circumstances, storm water discharges are to be minimised and 
are to:  
 
 be below or as near to  greenfield storm runoff rate and discharge volumes as i s 
practically possible, and  
 be no greater than that which existed prior to the redevelopment of a brownfield 
development area that already discharged storm flows to a combined sewer, and  
 be such as to ensure that there is no increased risk of causing environmental 
harm or increased flooding risk.  
 
Storm water sewer systems are outside the scope of this document and should be 
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the adopting authority.  
 
1.6 Specialist Works          
 
Pressure pipe, vacuum pipe and other specialised systems are outside the scope of this 
document and should be discussed separately with Irish Water if such are being 
proposed. For specialist Wastewater systems the Developer  will be asked to provide 
specific information to establish the whole life cost based on a 20 -year operation, and 
durability of the fixed and buried components relative to a conventional system, to 
enable a decision on suitability.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
14 
  
The use of inverted sip hons is also outside the scope of this document. Where 
proposed, specific Irish Water approval shall be sought and the siphon shall be 
designed to ensure that variation of flow is accommodated, self -cleansing velocities are 
achieved, and venting is incorpo rated to prevent air -locking, etc.  
 
1.7 Private Pipework  
 
Irish Water will not have responsibility for Drain s located within the Boundary of 
Premises . Irish Water  has wide -ranging powers pursuant to Section 43 of the Water 
Service Act 2007 to direct an owner of Premises  to carry out relevant work, or, to 
undertake the  work  itself and recover costs from the owner of the pipework.  
 
Private drainage systems shall:  
 
1.7.1  Comply with the current Building Regulations and be constructed in 
accordance with procedures and requirements outline therein  as well as other 
guidelines and legislation . 
1.7.2  Be located within the final site bound ary to ensure that the private D rains, 
gullies traps, Manhole s, inspection chambers, Armstr ong Junctions and 
similar private fittings are on the private property, with the exception of the 
private Drain connection to the public sewer.   
1.7.3  Not pass through property they do not serve . 
1.7.4  Serve only one unit  whether domestic or non domestic . 
1.7.5  Not provide a connection and/or use  any other mechanism to provide Water 
Services onwards to another location or Premises other than the Premises as 
set out in the Connection Agreement.  
 
The Developer shall provide and where necessary renew any Drain and shall take al l 
reasonable and proper care of same. Irish Water shall accept no responsibility for the 
maintenance, renewal, adequacy, safety or other characteristics of any Drain. For 
clarity, this means that the householder/owner shall be responsible for the renewal, 
maintenance and repair of the Drains on the Premises .   
 
The responsibility for the maintenance of the wastewater service connections from the 
Wastewater Works to Premises is outlined on the Irish Water website , www.wate r.ie 
and in the Pipe Maintenance Responsibility Diagrams included therein . 
  
1.8 Application for  a Conformance Certificate  
 
The level of site inspection and auditing carried out by Irish Water during the installation 
of the Works will depend  on whether  the Developer  uses his own contractors  to carry 
out works (Self-Lay) or the Developer  uses Irish Water ’s Regional C ontractors to 
construct the Works  (Irish Water Lay)  (See Section 1.3  above) .   
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
15 
 Irish Water’s field engineers will undertake site inspections  on the W orks in line with the 
Quality Assurance Field Inspection Requirements attached to the Connection 
Agreement during and throughout the construction of the Works . The Developer ’s site 
staff shall retain on the site of the Works a Quality Assurance Folder  to include 
information on , as well as  on-site quality assurance records of the Works installation. 
The document shall be updated as required and made available on request to the Irish 
Water field e ngineer for inspection. This document shall be used to facilitate the 
collation of the Final Document s as referred to below. A CCTV survey of the pipework 
and a SUS25 survey of the Manhole  chambers shall be undertaken by the Developer  at 
the end of the con struction  phase  and this is to be witnessed by the field engineer 
during a separate site visit. F inal site inspections will be carried out after the  submission 
by the Developer  of an application for the issuing of a Conformance Certificate . The 
Conformance  Certificate  is a document that will be  issued by Irish Water to the 
Developer  indicating compliance of the Works with Irish Water’s requirements following : 
 
1.8.1  Inspection of the constructed infrastructure  confirming that it is constructed in 
accordance with the Code of Practice and Standard Details . (If minor 
corrections  are required to the infrastructure (snags) a ‘ Defects Report ’ will 
be issued with the Conformance Certificate  outlining these minor defects ). 
and The Developer ’s submission of Final Documents   
The issuance of a Conformance Certificate marks the commencement of the Defects 
Liability Period.The Final Documents  shall comprise at least but not limited to  the following suite  of 
documentation:   Confirmation by a Chartered Engineer in writing  that the Works  has been 
installed in accordance with the design submitte d in the Connection 
Application.  
 Confirmation by a Chartered Engineer in writing  that the Works has been 
installed in accordance  with the Codes  of Practice  and Standard Details . 
1.8.5  Confirmation by a Chartered Engineer in writing indicating that the Works 
have undergone appropriate on -site testing, off -site testing and 
commissioning and provision of associated test result certificates. The 
requisite site tests for the Works include, but are not limited to, the following :  Air tests and water tests of gravity sewers . Water retaining tests completion results for Manhole s, chambers and 
pumping station  structur es. Testing completion results of pumping plant (if appropriate) . 
Pressure testing completion results of Rising Main s complete with a 
hard copy print out from the logger (in the required format) of the 
relaxation curve as proof of the outcome of  the test .  A printout of the joint details, with a GPS location of each joint.   Visual inspection completion results of Manhole s. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
CCTV report of the Works  shall conform to Irish Water CCTV Survey 
requirements  “As-Constructed” drawings and records of the constructed  Works in hard 
and soft copy to the Irish Water field engineers  in accordance with Sub -
Section 1.18.4 below .  “As Constructed” record  to be included in the drawings of service pipe 
installation completion (including link to House Numbers within the 
Development ). Safety File in accordance with the current Safety and H ealth Construction 
Regulations.  Operation and Maintenance Manuals  for pumping plant  (if such provided ) in 
accordance with Section 5.24  including full pump details, performance 
curves and power ratings, estimate of energy use, parts’ replacement 
schedule, maintenance requirements (as well as estimated costs for these), 
etc., and all warranty documentation for the installed equipment  as well as 
drawings of the pump station demonstrating the Area Classification of the 
pump station or otherwise the absence of zoning .  Deeds of Grant of Wayleave and Easement  and associated PRA Compliant 
Map(s) in accordance with  the Connection Agreement .   Proof of ownership of the Development in the form of Deed/Solicitor letter.   Confirmation by a Chartered Engineer of compliance with the Building 
Regulations and the Building Control (Amendment) Regulations, in 
particular evidence of compliance with the Building Regulations to ensure 
plumbing systems complian ce and no risk of contamination.   A construction stage hydraulic model (if relevant).    “As Constructed” Record Drawings (prov ided in hard copy and digital 
format) shall show the l ocation , layout plans, longitudinal sections and 
details of the Works and the Development  in full. Plan scales should be in 
common use, i.e., 1:200, 1:500, 1:1000 or 1:2500 as appropriate. Drawings 
should be prepared using an electronic system and submitted in “CAD 
compatible  (dwg /dxf)” file format. These d rawings shall contain the following 
information:  Manhole , pipe, pump station, service connection  and inspection 
chamber locations, (to Irish National Grid coordinates (ING)) to +/- 
500mm accuracy in the horizontal plane, with dimensions relating 
to fix ed Ordnance Survey co -ordinates.    Cover level and invert levels of Manhole s relating to fixed 
Ordnance Survey Datum  (Malin Head)  to an accuracy of +/- 
40mm  as well as the level of all connecting pipework thereto . Longitudinal sections, to an exaggerated vertical scale, (such as 
1:1000 horizontal and 1: 100 vertical) showing pipe installed levels, 
finished  ground levels,  pipe invert levels, pipe sizes, bedding  type, 
haunch and surround details, backfill details, together with 
Manhole  locations, fitting and inspection chamber locations, 
chainages, gradients, pipe materials, etc. All Manhole s should b e IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 identifi ed and provided with a location  to an Irish National Grid co -
ordinate (Information in Tabular Format on a Schedule of 
Manhole s).  Dwelling and building numbers. Construction details of pump station as well as mechanical, 
electrical and i nstrumentation equipment details. Details of any services and structures on the site, existing and 
proposed, especially those in close proximity to the Works  
including offset measurement to the Wastewater  collection and 
water supply system s. 
Necessary updates of the As -Built Record Drawings shall be provided on completion of 
the Development  Works along with the Final Documents . Where W orks are being 
carried out in a phased basis , a timeline schedule  of submitting the “as built” records 
shall be agreed with Irish Water. As a minimum, updated drawings shall be submitted to 
Irish Water every 6 months or when new elements of a Works have been made live.  
 
The Developer shall a lso provide details to Irish Water of the Storm Water collection 
system that is installed in  the Development site along with the Final Documents  in 
situations where the Storm Water collection system is connected to an Irish Water 
Network . This sh all include details of Sustain able Urban Drainage System (SUDS)  and 
associated control structures , if provided , to minimise the impact of Surface Water 
runoff from the Development. These details shall include layout plans and longitudinal 
sections of the Storm Water collection pipework  showing pipe sizes, Manhole  locations, 
etc. This level of information shall  be provided in the Final Documents for 
Developments where the Storm Water collection system is allowed to connect to an 
Irish Water combined Sewer  and it will be taken into account for the issuing of the 
Conformance Certificate.   
 
However, where the Development’s Storm Water collection system is not connected to 
an Irish Water Wastewater Works, t he provision of the details of the Storm Water 
collection system to Irish Water should be provided. However, its non -provision in these 
situations will not impact on the issuing of a Conformance Certificate . 
Irish Water requires a CCTV and Manhole  survey to be carried out in advance of the 
commencement of the Defects Liability Period and the issue of the Conformance 
Certificate. The CCTV and Manhole  surveys shall be carried out by the Developer  and 
shall be accompanied by a report dealing with the condition of the Works. I t is the 
responsibility of the Developer  to notify Irish Water at least ten Business Days ahead of 
survey works commencing. Irish Water and its agents will conduct audit inspec tions of 
these survey works at their discretion.  
The Developer’s node naming format will be accepted subject to the following 
conditions:  
 Node references shall be Alphanumeric:  
 the letter shall represent system type e.g. F for Foul,  S for surface  
It is the intention of Irish Water to apply standard Irish Water asset references 
following the receipt of the data and reports required in this section.  
The Developer  must engage the services of a competent surveying con tractor with 
suitably qualified person nel. CCTV and Manhole  survey information should be 
submitted to Irish Water in accordance with current Water Research Centre (WRc) 
specifications and Irish Water requirements , which are set out as follows.  
Sewer Condition Classification Format . sewer condition classification for each 
survey shall be undertaken in accordance with the Water Research centre (WRc) 
Manual for Sewer Condition Classification (MSCC) 5th Edition . 
 
Sewer Condition Scoring Scheme.  the sewer condition scoring scheme within 
the CCTV report shall be in accordance with the scoring scheme of the 
Sewerage Risk Management (SRM) Manual 5 produced by WRc.  
 
Qualifications and Training Requirements.  all  personnel responsible for 
classifying wastewater infrastructure condition, including those undertaking 
quality control, shall have completed training and achieved successful 
accreditation in a sewer condition classification course, such as Pipe Sewer 
Condition Classification OS19x. Evidence of appropriat e training and 
qualifications of personnel shall be provided to Irish Water by the Developer  on 
request. The above course shall have been successfully completed to enable 
personnel to classify pipe conditions to the level of Manual of Sewer Condition 
Class ification 5th Edition.  
 
Calibration of Equipment . all plant and equipment used during surveys shall be 
maintained and calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements. 
Calibration certificates shall be made available when requested by the Iris h 
Water Field Engineers/agents.  
 
CCTV Recording.  recordings shall show a continuous record of data displayed 
automatically on the monitor screen containing the following information:  
 Automatic update of the camera's  position (in metres) in the sewer 
line. 
 Date of survey  
 Direction of survey  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
19 Pipe dimensions
Manhole/pipe length reference
Condition assessment
Pipe material
Connection details
Camera Speed . the speed of the camera in the sewer shall be limited to 0.10 
m/s for sewers of diameter less than 200mm, 0.15 m/s for diameters exceeding 
200mm but not exceeding 300mm and 0.20 m/s for those exceeding 300mm, or 
such other speed as agreed with Irish Water as will enable all details to be 
extracted from the DVD recording. 
CCTV Video Files . digital CCTV video files are required to have consistent 
naming convention to enable linkage of the footage to Irish Water’s asset 
database of as-built records and GIS. The naming convention to be followed is: 
Start node reference _ Finish Node reference _ Direction of Survey (D or 
U) _ Date _ Time Survey Started
Date shall be in DDMMYYY format and Time shall be in HHMM format for 24 
hour clock.  
For example, a CCTV Survey started on 10th November 2012 at 12.23 from node 
F1 to node F2 in an upstream direction would have the name:  
F1_F2_U_10112012_1423 
The intention of the above naming convention is that it is clear which asset the 
survey relates to and that multiple surveys relating to a single asset can be 
differentiated.   
All video files must be housed within a digital folder named in accordance with 
the following format 
Development Name_Town 
The intention of the above naming convention is that Irish Water will be 
conveniently able to file the CCTV video footage files on the Irish Water systems 
under the relevant agglomeration or catchment name. 
Digital colour photographs . digital colour photographs shall be taken at the 
following points in all sewer surveys. 
General condition of the sewer at 20m intervals or each Sewer section
length whichever occurs most often
Service connections( photograph taken a right angle to service
connection to identifying unobstructed service connections)IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
  Protruding pipework  
 Defective connections & junctions  
 Debris 
 Cracks  
 Fractures  
 Broken Pipes  
 Deformation  
 Open Joints  
 Displaced Joints  
 At the point where a survey is required to be abandoned  
 
Photographs must show clear definition and accurately reflect what is shown on 
the moni tor, which shall be in proper adjustment. Photographs shall be of 
sufficient quality to enable clear interpretation of defect on a personal computer 
screen, laptop screen or on A4 print out. The digital photographs shall clearly 
identify the following:  
 Automatic update of the camera’s position in metres along the sewer 
line from adjusted zero  
 Sewer dimensions  
 Upstream and downstream Manhole  references  
 Direction of the survey  
 Photograph number within the survey report  
 Date photograph taken  
 Remark, identify ing the reason for the photograph  
Manhole  Surveys.  a specific Manhole  condition survey shall be completed in 
accordance with WRc Manual of Sewer Condition Classification 5th Edition and 
Irish Water Manhole  survey requirements as set out below. Survey report cards 
or an Excel workbook should include the following data.  
 Grid reference of Manhole , to Irish national grid coordinates.  
 Cover Material  
 Cover integrity  
 Roof slab integrity  
 Manhole  wall/ring unit in tegrity  
 Chamber material  
 Chamber size  
 Chamber integrity/ Confirmation that no infiltration exists  
 Material and diameter of all incoming and outgoing pipes.  
 Diagram showing incoming/outgoing pipes  
 Benching , channel, i nvert  quality , profile and orientation  
 Step Material  
 Step integrity  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
Manhole  Survey Photographs. photographs shall be submitted in digital ‘*.jpeg’ 
or similar suitable format and shall be a resolution of 1024 X 768 pixels. 
Photographs are required to clea rly identify the following.  
 Cover condition  
 Internal chamber condition  
 Benching  
 Backdrop details etc.  
 Channel layout and orientation, direction of flow   
 
Manhole  Survey Format.  it is a requirement of Irish Water that data collected 
during Manhole  survey is delivered to Irish Water in a in a Microsoft  Excel 
workbook format or in a format compatible with InfoNet.  
 
Developer’ s Quality Control Responsibility.  before submitting CCTV & 
Manhole  survey information to Irish Water the following quality cont rol regime 
should be implemented by the Developer . 
Stage 1:  The Developer  is responsible for checking that the CCTV and 
Manhole  surveys show no defects or debris. Any defects should be rectified 
followed by the generation of a final CCTV survey report (s).  
Stage 2: The Developer ’s consulting engineer  (Chartered Engineer)  shall 
administer a quality checking system. The quality checking system should 
incorporate visual inspections of the wastewater network and desk top 
studies which effectively gauges the acc uracy and consistency of the 
survey report produced by the surveying contractor. Any defects identified 
at this stage should be rectified by the contractor.  
 
Note : Survey reports submitted to Irish Water shall meet Grade 1 Structural &  
Operational classification as set out Sewerage Risk Management (SRM) Manual 
5 produced by WRc. Reports submitted to Irish Water which do not meet this 
classification will be returned to the Developer  for resubmission in a format 
acceptable to Irish Water . 
 
Reporting & Deliverable. The CCTV Final Reports and Deliverables to Irish 
Water shall include the following items:  
a. CCTV Defect Coding files . files shall be in “xml” format submitted to 
Irish Water in accordance with MSCC, 5th Edition.  
b. CCTV Video Files.  Mpeg format . 
c. CCTV Reports.  pdf format to include header information and defect 
coding information (as per MSCC 5) and all photographs taken.  
d. Manhole  Survey Reports . Reports submitted in “Excel ” format on CD 
or DVD with a hard copy of the survey reports. Manhole  referencing 
shall be consistent with the As Constructed Drawings (to Irish National 
Grid coordinates (ING)) to +/ - 100mm accuracy in the horizontal plane, 
with dimensions relating to fixed Ordnance Survey co -ordinates).  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  Sewer Network Layout.  PDF and AutoCAD version of Sewer Network 
layout (including surface water) which includes at a minimum the 
following details: - 
- Node references (as used during CCTV and Manhole  surveys)  
- Pipe diametrs  
- Direction of flow (flow arrow)  
- IW Standard symbology for nodes, pipes etc.  
f. Certification from the Developer ’s consultant engineer  (Chartered 
Engineer.  confirmation that a quality control regime has been 
implemented with the result that no defects exist in either the sewers or 
the Manhole s.  
 
All CCTV & Manhole  reports will be reviewed by Irish Water which will include visual site 
inspection against the information submitted. I t is the responsibility of the Developer  to 
ensure that defects do not exist.  
 
Irish Water will validate the data received using in -house validation rules and any 
anomalies will result in the data being returned to the Developer  for rectification and 
cleansing. A charge will be levied by Irish Water for additional review of CCTV and 
Manhole  reports should the Developer  fail in their responsibility to adequately enforce 
quality checking ahead of submitting reports to Irish Water.  This charge will be 
recovered from the Self-Lay Surety .  
 
In the event of the existence of deficiencies in the Works, Irish Water will identify areas 
of deficiencies and a programme of remedial works to rectify these deficiencies  shall be 
prepared by the Developer . Repairs of these deficiencies shall be carried out by the 
Developer  and confirmation obtained that the repairs achieved an adequately watertight 
system by a re -run of the CCTV survey  along the sewer at the defect location .  
 
If the Developer  does not carry out the CCTV and Manhole  survey s or does not carry 
out repair s of any deficiencies, Irish Water retains the right not to connect the Works to 
the Irish Water Network (s).  

Following Irish Water’s examination of the Final Document s and completion of all site 
inspections of the Works, the Developer  will be made aware of the outcome of these 
inspections in writing and may be required to undertake remedial work  and a further 
CCTV survey may be required to be submitted to Irish Water by the Developer . An 
additional inspection will be carried o ut if deemed necessary and, if accepted, Irish 
Water will issue a Conformance Certificate  and complete the connection of the Works  
to the Network(s) within the timeframe outlined in the Connection Agreement . If minor 
corrections  are required to the infrastructure (snags) a ‘ Defects Report ’ will be issued 
with the Conformance Certificate  outlining these minor defects.  These minor corrections 
shall be addressed by the Developer within a reasonable timeframe in advance of  the 
connection being made .  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
If the Developer  does not attend to the listed remedial requirements outlined in the 
“Defects Report ” or if these remedial works are not carried out or undertaken in a 
reasonable timeframe, Irish Water will have recourse to ca ll upon the Self-Lay Surety of 
the Connection Agreement or may not connect the Works to the Network . 
 
Irish Water reserves the position that Vesting of the Works in Irish Water or connection 
to the Network(s) will not take place until all Final Document s of the Works have been 
provided to Irish Water  and are deemed to be acceptable . 
 
1.11 Connection of Development to Irish Water ’s Network  
 
Following the completion of the minor corrections outlined in the Defects Report , Irish 
Water or its agents will carry out the connection of the Works to Irish Water’s  Network . 
The Defects Liability Period commences on the date of the Conformance Certificate . 
Irish Water will vest the Works upon  its connection to the  Irish Water  Netwo rk. However, 
the Developer  will remain responsible under the Connection Agreement for the cost of 
remediation of any defective works that are deemed necessary during the Defects 
Liability Period. Irish Water will undertake inspections, surveys and investigations to 
assess the continued compliance of the Works during the Defects Liability Period.  
 
The Developer  shall not proceed with “step -by-step” extensions of the initial approved 
infrastructure beyond that which has received Irish Water ’s agreement/consent via the 
Connection Agreement without making a formal application for and receiving Irish Water 
approval of any extension(s) of the Works  associated with the initial Development , i.e. 
the connection of subsequent phases of a development from the initial development's 
infrastructure, shall not proceed without a Connection Agreement being in place for the 
subsequent phase.  This will also apply where another developer  is seeking to connect  
into the infrastructure installed in the Development . Such extensions are regarded as 
addition al new Connection Works and are subject to the same level of Irish Water 
compliance, governance, etc., as the initial connection. These extensions will require 
separate Connection Agreements, payment, inspection, auditing, etc.  
Under the Connection Agreement, the Developer  agrees that the Works will become 
vested in the ownership of Irish Water immediately upon issuance of the Conformance 
Certificate by Irish Water.  
 
If the Works is deemed adequate after final inspection and the completion of 
remediation of defects a Conformance Certificate will be issued and thereafter a 
connection will be made to the Network. Upon the issuance of the Conformance 
Certificate the new infrastructure (the Works) will be vested in Irish Water in accordance 
with the Connection Agreement.  
 Prior to Vesting, the Developer  will be required to provide proof of title of the 
Development  land as well as whatever formal Deeds of Grant of Easements and 
associated PRA Compliant Map(s) are required in accordance with the Connection 
Agreement for pipework routes for the benefit of Irish Water. Deeds of Grant of 
Easem ents and associated PRA Compliant Map(s) for the route s of pipework for Irish 
Water required extensions for new development s adjacent to the Development  being 
advanced may also be required if Irish Water has required this as part of the Connection 
Agreement or has required the upsizing or extension of the Works to facilitate the 
adjacent future development s.  
 
The Developer  shall provide a Deed of Grant o f Easement and PRA Compliant Map(s) 
for the benefit of Irish Water in a form as set out in the Connection Agreement over all 
the lands which are intended to be taken in charge by the Local Authority under Section 
180 of the Planning and Development Act, 20 00. These areas shall be highlighted on a 
Property Registration Authority (PRA) compliant map and approved by Irish Water prior 
to execution of the Deed.  
 
The Developer  shall provide, where part of the Works are located in private land and fall 
outside lan ds intended to be taken in charge by a Local Authority, a Deed of Grant of 
Easement and PRA Compliant Map(s) in a form as set out in the Connection Agreement 
for the benefit of Irish Water, by the applicable landowner, of a wayleave incorporating a 
protect ed strip of a specified width at either side of the Works in that particular area in 
respect of the full length of the infrastructure. This is to ensure the ability of Irish Water 
to access the Works in the private land which will be highlighted on a Prope rty 
Registration Authority compliant map and approved by Irish Water prior to execution of 
the Deed.  
 
As part of the Connection Agreement, the Developer  shall agree to procure the 
completed registration of the Deeds of Grant of Easements outlined above by a Solicitor 
acting for the Developer  as soon as possible and within all applicable time limits 
prescribed in the Connection Agreement .  
 
Information rel ating to the assets will be uploaded to Irish Water Asset Information.  
 
The Developer will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the Water and 
Wastewater Services Infrastructure until the end of the Defects Liability Period. A t this 
point Irish Water’s Operation & Maintenance will assume responsibility of the operation 
and maintenance of the Works and this will be undertaken in accordance with Irish 
Water procedures.  
A Defects Liability Period  will apply to the  Works . The Defects Liability Period will 
apply for a minimum of 12 months  or such other period as may be specified by Irish 
Water in the Connection Agreement , between the issue of the Conformance Certificate 
and the issue of the Completion Certificate during which the Developer  is responsible IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
under the Connection Agreement for the rectification of any defects in or connected to 
the Works . Any defects found dur ing the Defects Liability Period are the responsibility of 
the Developer  and shall be completed at his/her cost .  
During the Defects Liability Period the Developer  shall execute or pro cure the execution 
of all works of repair reconstruction rectification and making good of defects 
imperfections, shrinkages or other faults as may be required of the Developer  in writing 
by Irish Water during the Defects Liability Period. Irish Water may undertake additional 
inspections, surveys, investigations to assess the continued adequacy of the Works 
during this period. Irish Water will notify the Developer  in writing of the need for such 
repair reconstruction or rectification works. All such works sh all be carried out at the 
Developer ’s expense.  
 
In the event of the existence of deficiencies in the Works  during the Defects liability 
Period , Irish Water will identify areas of deficiencies and a programme of remedial 
works to rectify these deficiencies . Repairs of these deficiencies shall be carried out by 
the Developer  and confirmation obtained that the repairs have achieved an adequately 
watertight system by a re -run of the CCTV survey.  
 
If the Developer  fails to execute or procure the execution of repair works, Irish Water 
shall be entitled to carry out such works and shall be entitled to recover from the 
Developer  the expenses reasonably incurred by way of deduction from the Security 
(Self-Lay Surety or Bond) provided under the Connection Agreement.  
 
The Self-Lay Surety shall be returned to the Developer  twenty eight (28) days after the 
completion of the Defects Liability Period subject to any deductions made pursuant to 
the Connection Agreement and sub ject to the Works being deemed adequate and 
satisfactory.  
 
The Developer  will remain responsible for the repair to the final road restoration of 
trenches. It is to be noted that the Developer  will be responsible for the upkeep of roads, 
footpaths, etc. unt il such time as the Development  is taken in charge by the Local 
Authority. The Developer  shall alert Irish Water of the proposed Taking in Charge 
schedule for the Development  by the Local Authority.  
 
Follo wing the installation of individual Premises service c onnections within the 
development during the Defects Liability Period, additional record documentation shall 
be provided by the Developer  to Irish Water. This shall comprise updated “As 
Constructed” records  of service pipe installation, location o f inspection chamber, etc. 
This information may be provided on a phased basis as blocks of houses are made 
ready for occupation by the Developer .  
Following The Defects Liability Period Irish Water will issue a Completion Certificate  to 
the Developer . Irish Water may deduct from the Self-Lay Surety any costs wh ich Irish 
Water may incur:  
 
1.14.1  in undertaking any works of construction , reconstruction , maintenance , 
rectification or repair or making good of defects , imperfections , shrinkages or 
other faults by reason of the Developer  or the Contractor failing to complete 
in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the specification 
aforesaid the entirety  of the Works  or, 
1.14.2  towards invoices or sums payable by virtue of any  actions, claims or 
demands made against Irish Water by any third party as a result of any act or 
default by the Developer . 
Irish Water will carry out a final inspection of the Works nearing the end of the Defects 
Liability Period. This inspection will , amongst other things , establish if any additional 
work has been carried out by the Developer  that might impact on the integrity of the 
Works since the issue of the Conformance Certificate  and commencement of the 
Defects Liability Period. Such impacts may be associated with the installation of other 
utility services without proper horizontal and vertical separation, installation of structures 
closer to the Works  than allowed, damage to the i nfrastructure by building works, etc.  
 
If defects are observed, additional CCTV or dye surveys may be required  to identify and 
locate such defects. The Developer shall, at their cost, undertake  such surveys  and, if 
not advanced by the Developer, will be undertaken by Irish Water and the cost  shall be 
recovered through any Surety  associated with the Connection Agreement. The 
undertaking of the CCTV surveys shall be as outlined in Section 1. 9 above.   
 
Additional works may have to be carried out by the Developer  to rectify these defects  if 
deemed necessary by Irish Water . If this is not executed by the Developer , it will be 
carried out by Irish Water and its funding  covered by the Security put in place v ia the 
Connection Agreement .  
 
If the infrastructure is deemed adequate after the Defects Liability final inspections , Irish 
Water will release  the Security  to the Developer  subject to any deductions that might 
arise due to monies owed for remedial works or other costs incurred by Irish Water.  
The Developer  shall obtain all necessary Requisite Consents  and other permissions for 
the proposed Development , including  the Works .   
The Developer  or his/her designer shall be responsible for all liaison s with the Local Fire 
Authority and for agreeing all arrangements for the advancement of the  construction of 
the Development . Any approvals that the Developer  obtained from the Fire Authority 
shall be provided to Irish Water  in the Design Submission .   
The Developer  shall comply with all  relevant  Irish legislation. The version of Acts and 
Regulations current at the time of the project shall be applicable.  
All materials shall be in accordance with  Relevant Standards  as well as with the 
relevant  European Standards (EN) covering the subject which is in force in the 
European Union. In Ireland ENs are published a s IS EN  and in the UK as BS EN . 
Where there is no relevant European Standard, materials shall be in accordance with an 
Irish Standard (IS) or a British Standard (BS). A UK Water Industry Specification (WIS) 
may be used where there is no relevant European Standard, Irish Standard, British 
Standard (BS) or European Union National Standard available.  
 
In the case of recently developed or innovat ive products, there may be no European 
Standard, Irish Standard, British Standard or European Union National Standard 
available. This may not preclude the use of a product where its performance or 
properties can be determined to align with its intended dut y and design life. Careful 
consideration should be given to any independent assessment of evidence of product 
performance.  
 
Developer s should discuss and agree the proposed use of newly developed products 
with Irish Water  and seek  derogation for the use o f such products . Such products shall 
only be used only if approval of the derogation is received and shall not be used without 
the prior consent of Irish Water.  Additional quality assurance requirements, including 
third party certification  may be required  (in Ireland this will be provided by or endorsed 
by the National Standards Authority of Ireland). The use of products which are not in 
accordance with the provision of a European Standard, an Irish Standard,  British 
Standard or of a European Union Nationa l Standard could result in the material, product 
or unit being excluded from use or, if installed, being removed from the Works at the 
Developer’s cost.  
The design and construction of Works  shall conform to the current version of the Civil 
Engineering Specification for the Water Industry (CESWI), subject to the particular 
requirements applied to it by Irish Water , as outlined in this Code of Practice . CESWI is 
a base document and it is published by the Water Research Centre (WRc plc). Irish IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
Water has developed additional Amendments and Notes for Guidance to CESWI to 
reflect its own additional general specification requirements. This Code of Practice is 
based on CESWI an d on the Irish Water Amendments thereto .  
Irish Water has developed Standard D etails describing typical infrastructure associated 
with the Works . These Standard Details shall be used as a minimum guide for the 
preparation  of designs and provi sion of infrastructure. A full set of the Standard Details 
for Wastewater  collection infrastructure is available  on the Irish Water website, at 
www.water.ie /connections/ .   
A Developer  requiring a Wastewater  connection during the Development construction 
period for collection of Wastewater  from temporary construction site office 
accommodation shall apply to Irish Water for the provision of this temporary connection. 
This temporary Wastewater  connection shall only be used for the collection of 
Wastewater  arising during construction activitie s and the connection shall not be used 
as the  permanent Works  of the Development .    
 
A Connection Application is required for a temporary Wastewater  connection. This is 
outlined in the Irish Water Guide to Connect which is available on the Irish Water 
website, at www.water.ie /connections/ . A Connection Agreement is required in all cases 
before Irish Water advances the provision of a temporary connection to its Wastewater  
collection Network . 
 
On completion of the construction of the Development , the temporary Wastewater  
connection shall be disconnected by Irish Water o r its agents and all of the 
infrastructure relating to it shall be removed  by the Developer  to ensure that it is not 
used as an unauthorised connection in the future. The cost of the disconnection work 
will be the responsibility of the Developer  and will be obtained through the Connection 
Agreement payments.    
Where it is identified by Irish Water that there is a strategic benefit in the possibility of 
connecting into or extending the Works to adjoining land that is not developed, the 
Developer  shall provide for future connections to these areas by upsizing and/or 
extending the Works  to the boundary of these contiguous properties , if required by Irish 
Water. This will be the subject of a separate Technical Requirements  Agreement.  
 
This upsized or extended pipe  will terminate in a “blind” Manhole , i.e. a Manhole  built at 
the end of the extension pipe without an invert benching or an inlet connection.  A 
temporary bung shall be installed in the outlet pipe from this “blind” Manhole .   
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
29 Irish Water will reimburse the Developer  for the cost of this pipe upsizing or extensions 
at a unit rate commensurate with the average cost of providing the Sewer. Irish Water 
will also cover the cost increase due to the marginal increase in pipe size within the new 
Network within the Development to service the future Wastewater load of the adjoining 
Development area. The Connection Agreement and associated Technical Requirement 
Agreement shall outline how such reimbursement is applied. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
30 Part 2 – Design Requirements and Submissions   
2.1 Introduction 
A Developer intending to seek a new connection from Irish Water should refer to the 
Irish Water Guide to Connect which is available on the Irish Water website, at 
www.water.ie . 
The Developer shall carry out or procure the design of the Works . The Developer’s 
designer shall be competent and the design shall be carried out strictly in accordance 
with this Code of Practice. Irish Water shall nominate the location of the Connection 
Point to the Irish Water Network(s). 
The provisions of the Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005 and associated 
Safety, Health and Welfare at Work (Construction) Regulations shall apply in relation to 
the design and construction of all Works .   
2.2 General Design Requirements 
The design shall incorporate a risk assessment to ensure that risks to both the local 
community and operators of the Works are minimised. The provisions of the Safety,  
Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005 and associated Safety, Health and Welfare at 
Work (Construction) Regulations shall apply in respect of the appointment of competent 
designers, Project Supervisor Design Process (PSDP) and Project Supervisor 
Construction  Stage (PSCS).  
The Developer or his /her designer shall certify that the design complies with the Code of 
Practice and Standard Details and accepts liability for compliance through their 
professional indemnity insurance, which shall be kept in place for a period of 6 years 
after the issue of the C ompletion Certificate . The Developer  shall ensure that this 
professional indemnity insurance is retained and that evidence of this is made available 
to Irish Water  in accordance with the Connection Agreement . The design 
responsibilities and liabilities shall not be discharged by Irish Water after the design 
passes a satisfactory insp ection and issue of a Statement of Design Acceptance, if a 
design submission is provided in advance of a Connection Application, or by  a de-facto 
Statement of Design Acceptance  via the Connection Agreement  if the design 
submission is submitted as part of the Connection Application . 
The design of the Wastewater infrastructure shall be such that a minimum design life is 
achieved of 50 years for pipework and structures, 25 years for mechanical and electrical 
plant and 15 years for information, communication and telemetry equipment (ICT).  
The Developer shall also provide separate Wastewater and Storm Water drainage 
systems for redevelopmen t proposals of brownfield developments. If infill development 
is proposed on brownfield sites and the Storm Water Sewer system already discharges 
to a Irish Water Combined Sewer, the Storm Water drainage system shall be designed IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 to ensure that Storm Water discharge from the infill development area is at or less than 
that which existed prior to the Development  and ideally is as near to a greenfield storm 
runoff rate as practicably possible  based on a SUDS assessment . The Developer  can 
reduce discharges of Storm Water from a Development  by the application of appropriate 
Storm Water controls systems, such as SUDS.   
 
If these requirements, Standards Details and Code of Practice guidelines, are not met, 
Irish Water is under no obligati on to provide a connection to its Network or vest the 
Works.  
Before the submission of a Connection Application for a new C onnection or an 
additional C onnection can be considered, appropriate in formation is required from the 
Applicant  to allow Irish Water to assess the Developer ’s Works proposal. This should be 
provided in a design submission  in advance of a Connection Application for 
Development s. Design submissions are to be submitted to Irish Water using 
cdsdesignqa@water.ie . Irish Water will engage with the Developer  to vet the design of 
the Works ahead of the Developer  finalising a planning application (for housing and 
mixed use developments to ensure compliance with the Codes of Practice and 
Standard Details).   The design submission shall comprise the following  information as a 
minimum : 
 
2.3.1  The applicant’s details, including name, address ( Developer ’s or Agent’s 
details are also required if different from the Applicant).  
2.3.2  Location of the Development with grid refer ence to the Irish National Grid.  
2.3.3  Type of Developm ent proposed that requires the C onnection, along with 
details of domestic and non -domestic properties that will be connected to 
the Works . 
2.3.4  Servicing deta ils, including the required Wastewater  discharge volume, 
Wastewater  quality parameters, Wastewater  discharge profile .  
2.3.5  Drawings outlining details of the Development  as outlined in Section 2.4 
below,  
2.3.6  Design calculations as outlined in Section 2.4  below.  
2.3.7  Site Investigation Report.  
2.3.8  Contaminated Ground Report (if relevant) . 
2.3.9  Mechanical and Electrical plant information (if relevant) . 
2.3.10  Surge analysis report and proposals for surge protection plant, if required.  
2.3.11  An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIS) or Appropr iate Asses sment 
(AA) Report (if relevant).  
2.3.12  An integrated utility layout plan showing the layout of all utility pipes, ducts, 
etc. and indicating the relative separation distances between the various 
utility infrastructure . 
2.3.13  Details of the Planning Permissio n and other statutory requirements 
relating to the Development , including Fire Authority  approvals , etc. . IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
32 2.3.14 A document outlining impact risks of the new infrastructure to existing Irish 
Water’s Wastewater collection and water supply infrastructure  to ensure 
that risks to both the local community and operators of the Works are 
minimised.  
2.3.15 Preliminary Health and Safety Plan. 
2.3.16 Construction Method Statements. 
2.3.17 The identity of the manufacturer for pipeline and accessories material , 
particularly if PE material is proposed.  
2.3.18 Manufacturers data sheets and certification for fittings and materials used 
in the Works.  
2.3.19 Specific information in relation to Specialist Works (See Section 1.6  
above) to establish the whole life cost based on a 20-year operation, and 
durability of the fixed and buried components relative to a conventional 
system, to enable an Irish Water assessment of  suitability. 
2.3.20 Where wastewater pumping stations or pumped systems are being 
proposed, an assessment of the whole life cost of the system indicating 
that it ’s capital and operating costs are less than the cost of conventional 
gravity systems over a period of 40 years, based on a Net Present Value 
(NPV) assessment. 
2.3.21 Where wastewater pumping stations are proposed, drawings and 
specifications of the pump station should demonstrate the Area 
Classification of the pump station or otherwise the absence of zoning. 
2.3.22 A report on specialist advice on separation distances between landscape 
works and the Works as obtained from a competent landscaping architect 
and/or arboriculturist to ensure that the required separations distances are 
achieved. 
2.3.23 The specific location for any scour valve chamber on rising mains requiring 
the approval of Irish Water and the relevant Local Authority. 
2.3.24 A design stage hydraulic model of the Works (if deemed relevant by Irish 
Water ). 
2.3.25 If applicable, a written statement from the Roads Authority in whose 
functional area the Development is located allowing the use of alternative 
acceptable Backfill material in lieu of Irish Water’s requirement for the use 
of Clause 804/808 granular material. 
2.3.26 If the proposal includes installing Works which are to be constructed on 
made ground, engineered ground or within fill zones, this should be clearly 
stated in the Design Submission   with such areas/locations or zones 
clearly identified and  indicated on a plan layout attached to the 
submission. Geotechnical reports shall be provided for the particular 
areas/locations or zones outlining the design for the pipe support system 
as well as  construction details at and along transitionary interfaces 
between made ground, engineered ground and fill zones and surrounding 
original or virgin ground. A method statement for the construction of the 
Works shall also be provid ed. 
2.3.27 A Floor Risk Assessment, together with flood mapping layout, shall be 
provided confirming compliance with Section 5.5 of this Code of Practice IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
33 
 dealing with flood risk analysi s, if applicable , complete with topographical 
survey and flood  mapping . 
2.3.28  Where pump stations are proposed a site specific anti -floatation set of 
calculations and measures proposed in respect of pump station structures 
(cast in -situ or pre -cast concrete).  
    
Irish Water will require the provision of appropriate design parameters, calculations, 
drawings, details, etc. from the Developer . The Developer ’s design wil l be vetted by 
Irish Water to ensure that it is in compliance with the Code  of Practice, Standard 
Details , specifications and good practice . Any deficiencies that are identified in the 
proposals will be advised to the Applicant during the design vetting assessment and 
these deficiencies shall be reme died to the satisfaction of IW . A revision of the design 
proposed shall be  submitted  and Irish Water will assess this revised design proposal . 
Irish Water will issue a Statement of Design Acceptance  if the design of the Works is 
deemed satisfactory. A Connection Agreement will not be issued unless the Developer ’s 
design proposal is acceptable to Irish Water.   
 
If a Developer  intends to proceed with a variation of the design proposal or construction 
standards which  has already been assessed as being s atisfactory by Irish Water , then 
he/she must apply to Irish Water for approval of the revised  design  proposal. This 
application for the variation must include all necessary data and information to prove 
that the proposed revised design  meets the requiremen ts of this Code of Practice . Irish 
Water is not obliged to accept the alternative design. If Irish Water accepts and agrees 
with the alternative proposals, written confirmation of acceptance of the waiver from the 
original design standards in whole or in p art will be provided.  
 
Irish Water will not provide retrospective approval of a variation of the design of the 
Works and is not obliged to provide a connection or complete Vesting of the Works  
based on an unapproved design . 
 
2.4 Drawings, Calculations and Design Information  
 
Drawings and calculations shall be supplied for the Works , inclu ding elements that are 
not to be vested in Irish Water  i.e. Pipes that are  not within the Attendant Grounds of  the 
Development . 
 
Layout plans shall be prepared with standard legends and symbols as required by Irish 
Water’s Drawing Standard and at least with water services industry norms . The 
drawings submitted by the Developer  shall show the precise layout as dictated by the 
local topography and all necessary detailed information required for guidance. The 
layout plans  shall show the site boundary, existing utility apparatus, North point, 
Ordnance Grid reference for the centre of the site, Ordnance Grid Reference for the 
Connection Point (s), etc. 
 
Location and layout plans, longitudinal sections and details should show the drainage 
system and the Development  in full. Plan scales are required to be shown at either IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
34 
 1:200, 1:250, 1:500, as appropriate , for A1 sheet size . Drawings shall be prepared in a 
digital format using “CAD  (dwg /dxf)” file format  and also submitted in PDF . Details to 
larger scales should be provided where necessary. The drawings  submitted shall also 
show the following:  
 
2.4.1  The location of the Development site on an Ordnance Survey Map with the 
site outlined in red,  
2.4.2  Layout roads and properties including plot numbers, phasing of the 
Development  (if relevant)  to include the overall development plan layout 
intended to be constructed and delivered in phases indicating phase lines 
and control breaks . 
2.4.3  Layouts of Sewer , outfalls, Manhole s, Storm Water  Sewer , details of all 
associated features and external property drainage details , including details 
of existing services in the cas e of infill or brownfield sites.   
2.4.4  Details of all over ground or underground structures  within the Attendant 
Grounds  and especially those  that are to be  vested by Irish Water.   
2.4.5  Contours of existing ground levels, proposed Development ground levels 
and property floor levels relative to Ordnance Datum (Malin Head) . 
2.4.6  Longitudinal sections, to an exaggerated vertical scale, showing proposed 
levels, existing ground levels, existing or proposed buried service crossings, 
invert lev els, pipe sizes, bedding, haunch and surround details, thrust 
blocks associated with pressure mains, backfill details, together with 
Manhole  locations, chainages, gradients, pipe sizes, pipe materials, etc. All 
Manhole s should be given unique, sequential numbers /letters  for 
identification . 
2.4.7  Locations of all natural features, such as trees, streams, rivers, springs, 
etc., which are in the vicinity of the Works . 
2.4.8  Location of manmade features, such as existing structures, buildings, 
roads, bridges, made ground,  engineered ground or fill zones, etc., which 
are in close proximity to the proposed Works . 
2.4.9  An integrated utility layout plan showing the layout of all utility infrastructure 
(ESB Network s, Gas Network s Ireland , telecommunication provider ducting, 
etc.) and indicating the relative separation distances between the various 
utility infrastructure , which shall be in accordance with Irish Water’s 
separation distance requirements . 
2.4.10  Layout taking into account possible future developments . 
2.4.11  Location of Ordnance Survey (OS) Benchmarks and their value to Malin 
Head Datum.  
 
The design shall be clear and unambiguous outlining the Wastewater  flows based on 
the type and number of units served, occupancy rate of the units, per -capita 
Wastewater  organic loads , etc. The design shall outline the dry weather flow, peak flow, 
etc. The Works  shall be designed using a n approved  software package, which 
generates  a Network  model  or spread -sheet , Sewer  flow, etc. in its output.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
35 
 The design shall be deemed to cover all associated and ancillary works such as pipe 
supports, beds, surrounds, backfill, surface restoration, access requirements, etc.  
 
The submission shall include a soil investigation report  including details of soil analysis, 
results of the soil ana lysis in tabular format, plans showing the locations where site 
investigations were carried out and the location of samples taken, details of known 
contaminants, details of possible contamination, mitigation proposals/measures to 
address soil contamination , details of standing water tables, made ground, engineered 
ground or fill zones, etc. Irish Water reserves the right to have its own independent site 
investigation work carried out to verify the results of the submitted site investigation data 
and reports . The cost of this will be recovered by Irish Water from the Developer under 
the Connection Agreement or under a separate Project Works Service Agreement.  
 
The submission shall include a schedule of materials along with manufacturer ’s data 
sheets and certificates for the materials required for the proposed Works , including the 
size and lengths of pipes, fittings, etc.  
 
The design submission shall provide specific information of any business ( non-
domestic ) customers  that are to be served, including information on Wastewater  arising 
from such developments , any special characteristics associated with the Wastewater , 
organic loads, etc., and Section 16 (Water Pollution Act) Licences (existing and future) 
associated with  these development s as well as any other pertinent information on such 
discharges . 
 
The submission shall also provide any relevant reports and information pertaining to the 
Development , such as Flood Risk Reports, Habitat Directive Reports, Appropriate 
Assessments, Sub -Threshold Environmental Impact Assessments, etc.    
 
Irish Water will nominate a  suitable  location for the Wastewater  Connection P oint(s) for 
connection of the Works  to the Irish Water Network  to provide adequate discharge 
capacity to meet the level of service, bearing in mind proposals for future Development . 
 
2.5 Hydraulic Modelling   
 
Irish Water may require the Developer  to provide a hydraulic model  of the Works  within 
the new Development  to confirm that the proposed Works  provides the best engineering 
solution and value proposal.  This is a mandatory requirement for a ll Works associated 
with developments containing more than 330 units.  
 
Hydraulic models shall be provided for all Storm Sew ers which are connected to the 
Irish Water combined sewer system.  
 
The ‘design stage’ hydraulic model of the proposed Works for the Development  (as well 
as the Storm Sewer system, if connected to the combined sewer system)  shall be 
constructed using appropriate data and all flow assumptions shall be comprehensively 
explained in accompanying documentation.  At the discretion of Irish Water , the IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
36 
 Developer  may be required to assist in the determination of the impact of the add itional 
Wastewater  flows on the existing Works  using the ‘design stage’ model inputs.  
 
Upon completion of the proposed Development , or at a designated stage of the 
Development  as required by Irish Water, the Developer  shall upgrade the ‘design stage’ 
hydra ulic model to a ‘ constructed  stage’ hydraulic model.  The ‘ construction  stage’ 
hydraulic model shall include information from as -built surveys and shall be verified in 
accordance with Irish Water’s latest model specifications.  
 
The Developer  shall demonstr ate to Irish Water (i.e. using the ‘ constructed  stage’ 
hydraulic  model) that the constructed Works  is performing to the hydraulic standards for 
which it was designed with results comprehensively demonstrated in accompanying 
documentation.  On site flow verification of the hydraulic model results shall be used to 
confirm this  and Irish Water shall be provided with an opportunity to observe these 
verifications.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
37 
 Part 3 – Works  Design  
 
3.1 Compliance             
 
The Works  shall comply with this  Code of Practice  and with the associated Standard 
Details for Wastewater Infrastructure  as a minimum unless otherwise agreed in writing 
with Irish Water in advance . The Works shall also comply with:  
 
3.1.1  The Standards set out in Appendix A . 
3.1.2  The Civil Engineering Specification for the Water Industry, 7th Edition 
(CESWI) , published by the Water Research Centre (WRc plc) . This 
document is subject to amendments set out by Irish Water appropriate to 
Ireland’s Water Services  sector  and this Code of Practice takes account of 
these amendments .  
3.1.3  The Environmental Protection Agency Guidance Document for Small 
Wastewater  Treatment Plants in terms of the expected Wastewater  loadings 
from various types of facilities , subject to any amendments arising from 
Appendix C .  
 
Proposed Developments shall be drained on the basis of a completely separate 
Wastewater  Sewer  system and Storm Water Collection system as outlined in 
Section 1.5 .   
 
3.2 Reliability  and Design Objectives          
 
Pipes shall b e free from defects or other features that might cause blockage or 
otherwise impede the design flow. Gravity Drain s, Service Connections  and Sewer s 
shall have adequate gradient to maintain self -cleansing conditions  (full pipe velocity 
generally greater than 0. 6 m/sec) . Rising Main s shall be sized to achieve self -cleansing 
velocities and excessive velocities in the Rising Main  should be avoided. The range of 
flow velocity within the Rising Main  shall be between 0.75 m/ sec and 1.8m/sec.  
 
3.3 Materials – General Requirements          
 
The Developer is responsible for the provision of materials and shall have an auditable 
system in place to trace materials from manufacture, specification, purchase  and 
through to delivery and their use in the permanent Works on site.  
 
Materials including products, components, fittings or naturally occurring materials used 
in the construction of the Works shall comply with this Code of Practice and be of 
suitable nature a nd quality for their intended use. In addition, materials used in the 
Works design and construction shall achieve the following:  
 
3.3.1  pollution of surface receiving waters and groundwater is prevented.  
3.3.2  for all practicable purposes, they are watertight  in acc ordance with relevant 
test requirements outlined in this Code of Practice .  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
38 
 3.3.3  odour nuisance or creation of toxic explosive or corrosive substances is 
avoided.  
3.3.4  noise and vibration is minimised  and 
3.3.5  any other negative impacts on the environment are avoided.  
 
The suitability of materials and products can be demonstrated by appropriate use of a 
product bearing CE marking in accordance with the EU Construction Products 
Regulations (No. 305/2011 –CPR) and any other relevant Directives which require:  
 
3.3.6  a product complying with an appropriate technical specification (as defined in 
appropriate Directives and Regulations).  
3.3.7  compliance with an appropriate harmonised Standard or European Technical 
Assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Constructi on Products 
Regulations (No. 305/2011 –CPR).  
3.3.8  Compliance with an appropriate Irish Standard or Agreement Certificate or 
with an alternative national technical specification of the European Union.  
3.3.9  a product bearing a CE Marking in accordance with the Const ruction 
Products Regulations (No. 305/2011 –CPR).  
 
From 1st July 2013, CE MARKING of construction products covered by harmonised 
European Standards is mandatory .  
 
Pipes should have sufficient ring stiffness to prevent deformation during storage, 
embedmen t and backfilling. Materials and components should comply with the 
following:  
 
3.3.10  the manufacturing process should minimise the use of solvent -based 
substances that emit volatile organic compounds or ozone -depleting 
substances.  
3.3.11  products should be made from recycled material, where reasonably 
practicable.  
 
In the event that ground conditions in any part of the site prove to be anything other 
than inert material, the Developer  shall inform Irish Water accordingly and  shall take 
whatever precautions are deemed necessary by Irish Water to deal with the situation. 
These precautions may include, but are not limited to, the laying of the Sewers which 
are specially designed for use in contaminated ground. Such Sewers shall also be 
installed in specifically designed t renches as approved by Irish Water  or other 
necessary requirements.  
 
3.4 Structural Design and Integrity – Specific Requirements      
 
The Works  shall be designed and constructed to ensure structural integrity over the ir 
design life. The design shall ensure that:   
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
39 
 3.4.1  all connections to existing Sewer s are carried out in a manner that do not 
compromise the structural integrity of the existing Sewer  and that the 
connection to the Sewer  does not damage the structural integrity of the pipe.  
3.4.2  buried pipes have sufficient depth of cover , as set out in Section 3.9  below,  
to afford adequate protection from anticipated imposed loading , including 
loading from the passage of construction plant as well a normal design  
loading , low temperatures and dam age from normal use of the land and 
where this cannot be achieved , there should be suitable alternative protection 
measures provided .  
3.4.3  Manhole s and branch pipework are built in to the Works  for planned future 
connections , to the requirements of Irish Water, if requested .  
3.4.4  if the depth of cover to the crown of the pipe is less than the values required  
herein , protection measures are required by, in order of precedence,  either 
the provision of a reinforced concrete slab  of C30/35 concrete to IS EN 206,  
the provision of full  concrete surround of C16/20 concrete with flexible joints  
or the use of a ductile iron pipe  for the distance where the depth is below 
requirements or a combination of these requirements , all details of the  
protection measures shall be to be agreed with Irish Water .  
3.4.5  all pipes have the structural ability to resist the possible incidence of 
punching shear . 
3.4.6  no vertical load is imposed by structures such as shafts onto non -load 
bearing components such as the pipes . 
3.4.7  the Works is resistant to tree root ingress where there is a risk of such 
intrusion, (e.g. by use of appropriate barriers or pipelines constructed from 
polyethylene with welded joints , see also Section 3.21  below ). 
3.4.8  the Works shall be watertight in a ccordance with test requirements to prevent 
ingress to and egress, especially at connection locations.  
3.4.9  trees and large shrubs shall not be planted over the Works.  
 
3.5 Layout of Works  and Manhole s      
 
The layout of Gravity Sewer s, Rising Main s, Manhole s and chambers in the Works  
shall:  
 
3.5.1  be as simple as possible . 
3.5.2  ensure infrastructure is located so that if there is a structural failure an 
excavation may be carried out to repair the failure without impairing the 
integrity of adjacent buildings , other infrastructure s or trees/shrub 
landscaping  (See Section 3.5.9  below) .  
3.5.3  ensure infrastructure is located in pavements, roads or in open spaces 
(Rising Main s may be located in either roads/areas or in private property , 
subject to the provision of an Easement  giving Irish Water access for 
maintenance , operational , renewal, replacement and upgrading activities ). 
3.5.4  ensure infrastructure is designed and constructed in order to provide access 
for any reasonably foreseeable maintenance , renewal, replacement and 
upgra ding activities  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
40 
 3.5.5  ensure infrastructure is located so that it is safely accessible and apparent to 
Irish Water or its Agents  and that covers are located at finished ground level . 
3.5.6  ensure infrastructure is laid on the side of the street/road where the housing 
density is greatest so that the number of service pipes road crossings are 
minimised  and the lengths of the service connections are minimised . 
3.5.7  ensure  that a single collection network , as opposed to dual networks , is 
provided . and 
3.5.8  ensure that the maximum distance between Manhole s does not exceed 90m  
for 225mm diameter pipes and above and does not exceed 75m for 150mm 
diameter pipes (as outlined in Section 3.12.1.3 ).   
 
Alternative routes shall be considered to identify the best achi evable route that takes 
account of whole -life cost arising from a combination of the construction , maintenance, 
operation and eventual decommissioning of the asset  (See also Section 5.2 , Pumping 
Station General Requirements) .  
 
Sewer s shall be located to ensure acceptable clearances between the line of the new 
Sewer  and the proposed property construction and any existing structures and features 
on the site. Under no circumstances will Irish Water accept Sewer  installations 
under structures, existing or proposed, or in close proximity to existing 
structures or features that will inhibit access for post installation maintenance 
and access  or future works .  
 
The following general requirements shall apply to the locations of the Work s in new 
Development s that are covered by this Code of Practice : 
 
3.5.9  The external face of any new Sewer  shall be at least 3.0 m  or a distance 
equivalent to the depth of the Sewer  below the foundation, whichever is 
greater, from the external face of any building or Development  structure . 
Modified foundation arrangements do not obviate the need for this 
separation distance . This is to allow future access for maintenance , 
operation, future renewal, replacement , upgrading work , etc.  of the pipeline. 
Foundations and basements of adjacent buildings should be designed to 
ensure that no extra loads are transferred to the pipeline , i.e. the pipe 
should be located outside the zone of influence of the building foundation . 
The minimum clear distance shall be increased if the Sewer  is greater than 
3m deep or if the diameter is greater than 375mm. The minimum clear 
distances for pipe diameters of 450mm diameter and greater (outside the 
diameter size covered by this Code of Practice) or depths e xceeding 4.0m 
shall be based on specific consultation with Irish Water . These separation 
distances also apply to separation from other existing structures, including 
attenuation structures and swales .   
3.5.10  Sewer s and service connections sh all not be constructed under any building 
or structure. No building may be constructed over the line of a Sewer , 
service connection or Drain . This approach is  in accordance with Section 29 
of the Public Health Act 1878  and the Water Services  Act. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
41 
 3.5.11  Sewer s and Rising Main locations shall be agreed with Irish Water and , 
where practicable, shall be located in areas that are or will in future be 
maintained by the Local Authority , i.e., road verges, roads and public open 
space or a space where they are reasonabl y accessible and visible. 
Wayleaves and Dee ds of Easement shall be provided for all Sewer routes. 
Sewer s shall not be laid in enclosed private land, where there is a 
practicable alternative route . 
3.5.12  Between Manhole s, Sewers shall be laid in straight lines in both the vertical 
alignment (profile) and horizontal alignment (plan) . However, long radius 
bends up to 45 degrees may be laid on 100mm wastewater service 
connections downstream of the private side inspection chambers  to 
facilitate the transition from horizontal to vertical at  the point where the 
service connection drops into the trench to connect to branch connection on 
the Network  Sewer . 
3.5.13  The angle between any inlet pipe to a Manhole  and the outlet pipe from the  
Manhole  shall not be less than 90 degrees, i.e., the inlet flow from any inlet 
pipe should not run count er to the outlet flow direction  and suitabl y profiled 
benching shall be provided to ensure smoot h flow conditions . 
3.5.14  Where Wastewater  and Storm Water  Manhole s are adjacent, their positions 
shall be staggered to allow for crossing over of Sewer s. Staggered 
positioning of Wastewater  and Storm Water  Manhole s is required with a full 
separation between the Wastewater  and Storm Water  Sewer  systems (Note 
that Irish Water does not have responsibility for Storm Water  Sewer  
systems.) . The external walls of the staggered manholes shall be separated 
by at least 500mm to allow compaction of backfill material between the 
structures . 
3.5.15  The design of landscaping shall be undertaken at the same time as the 
design of the Drain s and Sewer s so that the impact of tree roots on the 
Works  can be considered  (see Section 3.21  below) . Trees/bushes/shrubs  
shall not be located closer to the Sewer or Drain than the canopy width at 
mature height, except where special protection measures are provided. A 
tree should not be planted directly over Sewer s or where excavation onto 
the Sewer  would require removal of the tree . 
3.5.16  When in a road or highway  (and in a ddition to Section 3.5.9 ), the outside of 
the Sewer  to which this Code of Practice applies should be in the vehicle 
carriageway (not footway) and shall be at least 1.0 m from the kerb line. The 
external faces of Manhole s and chambers should be at least 0.5  m from the 
kerb line . 
3.5.17  A Storm Water  sewer  or a Wastewater Sewer  should generally not be 
installed to cross over a Water Main. When the surface water or 
Wastewater Sewer is being installed under a Water Main, adequate 
structural supports shall be provided to maintain the structural integrity of 
the Water Main. A method statement for the proposed crossing shall be 
provided. Where crossing over a Water Main is unavoidable , the surface 
water or Wastewater Sewer crossings  shall not be located directly above IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
42 
 the joints in the Water Main . No other utility service should be laid 
longitudinally directly above the line of the Wastewa ter Sewer . 
3.5.18  Any Sewer  crossing of a Water Main  shall do so at right angles, or as near 
to as possible, to avoid prolonged envelopes of influence between the 
services. Crossings shall be located midway between the Water Main  joints 
with a minimum vertical clear distance of at least 300mm and up to 500mm  
or more in some instances between the Sewer  pipe and the Water Main . All 
such crossings shall be to Irish Water approval and shall not be undertaken 
until Irish Water or its a gents has examined the work at the crossing point 
and deemed it fit for backfilling . 
3.5.19  Specific vertical separation distances for wastewater service connections 
and Sewers to other pipework, including utility service pipes and ducts, shall 
be in accordance w ith the Table at the end of this Section . 
3.5.20  There should be a minimum clear horizontal distance of at least 900mm 
between the external face of a Gravity Sewer /Rising Main  and other 
pipe/duct utilities running parallel to it, with a clear local horizontal distance 
of 300mm between the external face of a Gravity Sewer/Rising Main and 
cabinets, poles, junction boxes, Manhole s or chambers . 
3.5.21  Specific separation clearance distances in excess of those outlined above 
shall be provided for services such as gas, electricity, fibre -optic or oil filled 
cables as the case may be. The particular utility providers shall be 
consulted to determine these minimum separation distances and evidence 
of this consultation, with the specified separation  distances, shall be 
provided to Irish Water at design submission stage. For example, the 
minimum separation distances for Gas Network s Ireland infrastructure shall 
be in accordance with IS329 ‘Gas Distribution Mains’ and IS328 ‘Code of 
Practice for Gas Tr ansmission Mains’ as amended/updated . 
3.5.22  A Deed of Grant of Easement shall be provided for all Sewers and Rising 
Mains prior  to the ir construction. Connections to the Irish Water Network will 
not be permitted without such Easements having been submitted and 
accepted by Irish Water. Construction and permanent Deed of Grant of 
Easement , comprising a conditional Burden on the Title, are to be provided  
complying with particular widths requirements outlined in the Connection 
Agreement and such Easement  should be to the benefit of and registered 
with Irish Water as the owner following Vesting . The Easement  shall not be 
built upon after the installation of the Sewer  or Rising Main . The 
construction techniques should be selected to ensure that the maximum 
settlement is within the agreed limits . 
3.5.23  Rising Main s shall be laid in straight lines  or in gentle curves,  to 
manufacturer’s requirements, or using long radius bends . Where bends are 
used, they should be formed with proprietary bends of suitable material 
allowing for a fully integrated joint, and securely anchored with thrust 
blocks , if deemed necessary.   
3.5.24  The provision of access points , comprising rodding points  and chambers,  
for pigging , rodding or cleaning of the Rising Main  is required along its 
entire length , espec ially along long Rising Main s.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
43 
 3.5.25  Where  possible, Rising Main s shall be evenly graded between the intake 
point and the discharge point. If a continuous rise cannot be achieved, the 
Rising Main  should be fitted with sewage air valves and scour valves  as per 
the hydraulic design of the system . Both of these should be suitable  for use 
with raw Wastewater . The valve locations shall be clearly marked by the 
provision of indicator plates and posts.  
3.5.26  The design of the Rising Main shall take account of the c ontainment of the 
Wastewater  volume during pigging, rodding and cleaning operations at the 
scouring point and provisions  shall be made for ease of collection of the 
Rising Main contents by vacuum tanker and transportation of this to a 
suitable point for treatment or reintroduction into the Wastewater  collection 
Network . 
3.5.27  The route of Rising Main s should be marked at every field boundary and, 
where practicable, at every change of direction by marker posts. The 
marker plates shall be labelled “RM”  and the depth to the top of the Rising 
Main  as well as the distance to the main  shall also be  provided .  
3.5.28  Non-degradable marker tape , red or orange in colour , shall be installed 
300mm above the crown of the Rising Main . In the case of non -metal pipe 
material, the marker tape should incorporate a trace w ire which is linked to 
the marker posts and terminating at the Wastewater  pumping st ation and 
the discharge Manhole . The trace wire shall be tested to ensure that it is 
continuous and capable of transmitting locating signals . 
 
In the case of installations to be constructed in close proximity to existing Sewer s, 
specific approval of Irish Water shall be obtained. In the case of existing Network  
pipework, alternative minimum horizontal distances shall be maintained between 
pipes/d ucts, cabinets, poles, Manhole s, junction boxes, chambers, etc., as outlined in 
Section 3. 20 below.  
 
Further to Section 3.5.19  above, t he separation distances outlined in the Table below 
shall apply for wastewater service connections  at crossings of Irish Water’s Water 
Mains and Sewers . For other utility pipework , specific advice shall be sought from the 
Utility Provider in respect of their separation distance requirements. .  
Scenarios where the network sewers cross or traverse one another within a 
development footprint should be minimised and should be clearly identified by the 
Developer’s designer and indicated in their respective design submission to Irish Water. 
On that bas is Irish Water will have clarity on the separation distances at crossing points. 
In all instances the separation distance that is required by the utility service provided 
should be observed as outlined in Section 3.5.21  above.  
In relation to the domestic service connections, the applicable IW design pipe gradient 
shall apply. This shall take account of excluding the likelihood of excessive gradients if a 
Developer were to apply only the minimum separation distance criteria at a crossing  as 
governing design  criteria and assuming a straight line grade between the crossing and 
the inspection chambers, while ignoring the need to comply with the pipe gradient rules.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
44 
  
 Separation 
distance 
between Service 
Connection 
above and pipe 
below.  Separation 
distance 
between Service 
Connection 
below and pipe 
above if pipe is 
100mm or less  Separation 
distance 
between Service 
Connection 
below and pipe 
above if pipe 
above exceeds 
100mm 
diameter.  Separation 
distance 
between 
sewer above 
and pipe 
below  Separation 
distance 
between 
sewer below 
and pipe above  
Non 
Trafficked 
Areas  100mm  100mm  150mm  Pipe bedding 
depth of the 
upper pipe  Pipe bedding 
depth  of the 
pipe below   
Trafficked 
Areas  150mm  150mm  150mm  300mm  300mm  
Note:  The separation distances relate to that between the service connection pipe and 
other Irish Water asset pipework. The separation distance requirements of other Utility 
Providers shall apply in respect of their utility pipes/ducts.  
 
3.6 Hydraulic Design for Gravity Sewer s  
          
The hydraulic design of the Works  shall include an allowance for envisaged flows as 
well as increased flows that might be reasonably foreseeable within the Development , 
based on Local Authority Development Pla ns or as advised by Irish Water . 
  
Gravity Sewers  should be designed to convey the projected flows together with an 
allowance for:  
  
3.6.1  variations in Wastewater  flows resulting from increased occupancy or 
intensification of the Development  commensurate with the introduction of 
water saving measures . 
3.6.2  increased trade effluent flows resulting from reasonable changes in use or 
intensification of an indust rial or commercial Development , including mixed 
use Developments . 
3.6.3  levels of groundwater inf iltration that might reasonably be expected over the 
life of the Drain  or Sewer  system.   
3.6.4  inflow of surface water that might reasonably be expected due to leakage or 
accidental connection, giving rise to partially separate flows.   
 
The Irish Water requirements for the design of wastewater gravity sewers are set out in 
Appendix B of this Code of Practice .  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
45 
 However, for Works in residential Developments, the sewer capacity criteria for a 
development are considered to be satisfied , without the need for a full Appendix B 
design assessment, where the pipe size and gradient requirements for the full potential 
development population corresponds to those in the Table below for the number of 
dwellings shown. For small numbers of housing units , the use of higher peak flow 
multipliers may be used for design purposes to reflect the proximity to source and the 
attenuation that naturally occurs in the Sewerage system.   
 
Table: Sewer Size /Gradient  for Multiple Properties  
Number of Dwellings  Pipe Diameter  Minimum Gradient  
2 to 9 150mm (or 
225mm)  1:60 
10 to 20  1:150  
21 to 210  
225mm  1:200  
211 to 250  1:150  
251 to 330  1:100  
331 – 450  
300mm  1:300 
451 to 565  1:200 
566 to 655  1:150  
656 to 830  1:100  
 
For developments which do not comply with the above Table, sewers sh all be designed 
fully in accordance with Appendix B so as to convey the following flows:  
 
 Works which carry domestic Wastewater  shall be designed to carry a 
Wastewater volume of between 6 times and 2.5 times the dry weather flow 
depending on the size of the Development, as outlined in Section 2.2.5 of 
Appendix B. Dry weather flows (DWF) should be taken as 446 litres per dwelling  
(2.7 persons per house and a per capita Wastewater flow of 150 litres per head 
per day along with a 10% unit consumption allowance in line with Section 3.6.3  
above and Section 2.2.4 of Appendix B ) (rounded up to 450 litres) .  
 
 Where the Works carry industri al or commercial Trade Effluent and Wastewater , 
the Sewer collection system shall be designed to carry the flows outlined Section 
2.2.6 to 2.2.9  of Appendix B.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
46 
  Allowances for flows associated with Section 3.6.4  above and for Urban Creep, 
as outlined in Section 2.2.10  of Appendix B, shall also be incorporated into the 
design of the wastewater collection system.  
 
 
The Works  shall be watertight in accordance with the test criteria outlined in Section 
4.10 to minimise the ingress of groundwater and Surface  Water and the egress of 
Wastewater . 
 
When calculating emergency storage requirements in accordance with Section 5.2 , 
Section 5.7  and Section 5.11 of this Code of Practice , average trade wastewater flows 
should be used towards the calculation of the storage capacity requirement . The 
storage capacity requirement shall be between 6 and 24 hours , depending on the size 
of the Development . Where the trade wastewater flow, as outlined in Section 2.2.8 of 
Appendix B  are used to estimate the maximum trade wastewater flow , these can be 
converted to an average trade wastewater flow by dividing by a factor of 3.  
 
Storage fac ilities may be required at the Premises  site to balance the discharge fr om 
the site if requested by Irish Water to limit the effluent discharge so that the allocated 
capacity of the Irish Water Network  is not exceeded.  Details of such storage should be 
provided in the design provided at Connect ion Application Stage.   
 
As a general rule, it is preferable to aim to achieve self -cleansing velocity in the pipe 
system at least once per day. This varies for pipe sizes with self cleansing velocity of 
0.75m/sec for pipes less than 300mm diameter and 0. 77m/sec for pipes 375mm  and 
450mm diameter. The designer should aim to achieve a flow velocity at the design flow 
(i.e. peak flow) of between the required self cleansing velocity  (using 0.7 5m/sec)  and a 
velocity of 2.0m/s, with an absolute velocity of 2.5m/s as an upper limit.  
 
Subject to the limitations imposed by the foregoing, pipe sizes and gradients shall be 
selected from approved pipe design tables , based on an approved design  approach , 
such as the use of the Colebrook White equation . It may not be possible to provide a 
self-cleansing velocity within  small diameter pipe sizes, while meeting the minimum flow 
velocity requirement of 0.75m/sec design flow. Where this requirement cannot be met, 
the criterion would be considered to be satisf ied by the following :  
 
3.6.5  a 150 mm nominal internal diameter Gravity Sewer  is laid to a gradient not 
flatter than 1:150 where there are at least ten dwelling units connected  or 
1:60 for up to nine connected dwelling units . or 
3.6.6  a service connection  with a nominal internal diameter of 100 mm  laid to a 
gradient not flatter than 1: 80, where there is at least one WC connected and 
1:40 if there is no WC connected.  
 
These parameters should not be taken as a norm when the topography permits steeper 
gradien ts. Hydraulic studies indicate that these requirements may not necessarily 
achieve a self -cleansing regime. When a choice has to be made between a Gravity IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
47 
 Sewer  system  and pumped pipe system , these criteria should not be regarded as 
inflexible .  The roughn ess value (ks) for  Gravity Sewer  design should be chosen to suit 
the material being proposed and the “long term roughness value” should be chosen.  
 
In general, pipes of 100mm  diameter should be laid at minimum gradients of between 
1:60 and 1:100. Pipes of 150mm  diameter should be laid at a minimum gradient of 
1:150. Pipes of 225mm diameter should have a minimum gradient of 1:200 and pipes of 
greater diameter should comply with  self cleansing and maximum velocity requirements. 
Pipe gradients for private side drainage should be constructed in accordance with that 
indicated above as a minimum, or with Building Regulations requirements.   
 
The maximum allowable gradient for gravity  sewers should be chosen so as to achieve 
a full bore velocity of no greater than 2.5m/s.  Typically , this can be achieved with the 
maximum gradients outlined in the T able below:  
 
Table: Maximum sewer gradients  
Pipe Diameter  Maximum Pipe 
Gradient  
150 mm  1:13 
225 mm  1:22 
300 mm  1:31 
 
Steeper gradients than those in the above table may be considered in cases where it 
can be proven that the pipe will not be flowing at full bore at any stage in its design life. 
In these cases maximum gradients can be determined based on achieving a veloci ty of 
no greater than 2.5m/s while the pipe is conveying the maximum design flow as outlined 
in Appendix B. 
 
In either case, Gravity Sewer Pipes should not be laid with a gradient steeper than 1:12. 
Where ground profiles dictate steep gravity sewer gradien ts, backdrop Manhole s shall 
be incorporated into the Works to ensure that the steep gradient limit s set out above are  
not exceeded.  
 
3.7 Hydraulic Design for Rising Main s         
  
Rising Main s shall  comply with the following:  
3.7.1  The hydraulic design shall include an allowance for envisaged flows that 
might be reasonably foreseeable within the Development . 
3.7.2  The diameter should be such that the velocity of discharge is in the range 
0.75m – 1.8m per second and that any blockages of th e pipeline are avoided . IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
48 
 3.7.3  Diameters of less than 80mm shall not be provided and the typical minimum 
diameter should be 100mm diameter ( Rising Main s of a lower diameter might 
not be taken over by Irish Water) . 
3.7.4  Pipes less than 80mm will only be considered with  the use of appropriately 
sized/type pumps. Such systems are only appropriate for taking low flow 
volumes and shall be provided with suitable anti -septicity systems . 
3.7.5  The roughness value (ks) should be chosen to suit the material being 
proposed and the “long term roughness value” should be chosen as being 
suitable for mean velocities between 1.1 and 1.8m/sec . 
3.7.6  The i nstalled minimum gradient shall be 1:500  rising and 1:300  falling with 
Wastewater  type air release valves at the high point to facilitate air removal . 
3.7.7  The gradient shall be a continuous rise without air valves , where possible.  
3.7.8  Where it is proposed to install rising mains with gradients that are steeper 
than 1:10, the Developer shall advise and seek review by Irish Water’s 
Connection and Developer Services. Alternative gradient proposals may be 
required in such instances.  
3.7.9  Rising Mains  longer than 500m  shall have provision for in -line rodding, 
access and cleaning  by the provision of in-line propri etary rodding chambers 
at centres not exceeding 200m . 
3.7.10  Drain  and washout facilities at low points should be provided with 
infrastructure for collection and appropriate treatment of the drained contents 
in order to ensure protection of the environment during  such operations . 
3.7.11  Wastewater type air release valves  should be provided at high points to 
counteract air coming into solution . 
3.7.12  Rising Mains should be designed  to avoid septicity (twin pipe systems if 
necessary) . 
3.7.13  Surge analysis , subject to Irish Water approval, should be carried out for all 
Rising Main s and surge protection should be provided, where deemed 
necessary, for Rising Main s to protect the pipe from shock. Cyclic fatigue of 
pressure pipe systems should also be taken into account in the des ign of the 
pipeline. 
3.7.14  Rising Mains should not discharge directly to a Sewer . In all cases, a 
separate discharge Manhole  or header /stand off  chamber shall be provided 
(see Section 3.1 5). This Manhole /chamber will be linked to the receiving 
Sewer  by a short section of Gravity Sewer  (minimum of 100mm diameter  and 
sized to carry the peak pumped flow ) connected to the receiving Sewer  at a 
Manhole  location. A Y branch  connection between the gravity discharge pipe 
and the Sewer  shall be used  for single house pumped discharges. The 
discharge Manhole  or header chamber shall be sized and designed to avoid 
turbulence and to achieve a smooth discharge to the Gravity Sewer  system. 
Venting of the header Manhole  to a vent -column shall be provided , complete 
with passive odour control . A pressure sealed Manhole  shall also be 
provided.  
3.7.15  Scouring arrangement of the Rising Main shall be incorporated in accordance 
with Section 3.5.25  above.   
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
49 
 3.8 Pipe Sizes             
 
The minimum size for  a Gravity Sewer , subject to the criteria outlined in Section 3.6  
above,  should be :  
 
3.8.1  150mm nominal internal diameter for carrying Wastewater  from 20 properties  
or less . 
3.8.2  At least 225mm nominal internal diameter  carrying Wastewater  from more 
than 20 properties . 
 
The minimum size for a  Service C onnection  shall be 100 mm. The minimum size for 
Gravity  Sewer  serving less than 20 properties shall be 150 mm  diameter . The minimum  
pipe size for Gravity Sewer  where more than 20 housing units are connect ed shall be  
225mm  diameter subject to hydraulic design capacity assessment  requirement . A pipe 
size greater 225mm diameter shall be provided where the design flow exceeds the 
capacity of the 225mm diameter pipe.  
 
The minimum size for  a Rising Main  should not be less t han 80mm internal diameter . 
Rising Main s less than 80mm will only be considered with the use of appropriately 
sized/type pumps. Such systems are only appropriate for taking low flow volumes and 
shall be provided with suitable anti -septicity systems.  
 
3.9 Depth of Cover          
 
Gravity Sewer s and Rising Mains  shall be designed in accordance with the 
requirements of BS 9295. As a general guide t he, minimum depth of cover from the 
finished surface to the crown of pipe work  without protection  should be as follows:  
  
3.9.1  Areas without any possibility of vehicular acces s - depth not less than 0.5 m . 
3.9.2  Driveways, footways, parking areas and yards with height restrictions to 
prevent entry by vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 7.5 tonn es 
- depth not les s than 0.75 m.   
3.9.3  Driveways, footways, parking areas and narrow streets without footways (e.g. 
mews developments) with access for vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in 
excess of 7.5 ton nes - depth not less than 0.9 m.   
3.9.4  Depths of pipes  in gated estates shall be as outlined above  points 3.9.1 -
3.9.3.  
3.9.5  Agricultural land and public open space - depth not less than 0.9 m .  
3.9.6  Other roadways, highways and parking areas with unrestricted access to 
vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 7.5 tonnes – depth not less 
than 1.2 m.  
 
The depth of cover to pipework  can be reduced by the installation of protection 
measures , but an absolute minimum depth of cover of 500mm in un -trafficked areas 
and 750mm in trafficked areas shall apply when protect ion measures are used . 
Appropriate protection measures are discussed in greater detail below. The depth of IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
50 
 cover is also dependent on whether the pipework  installation is a rigid or a flexible 
construction.  
 
If the depth of cover to the crown of the pipe i s less than the values set out above in 
Section 3.9.1 to 3.9.6 , protection measures shall be provided . Consultation with Irish 
Water is required in relation to the provision of these measures. I n order of precedence, 
the protection measures may comprise either the provision of a reinforced concrete slab 
designed to spread the imposed traffic load away from the pipe, slab to be a minimum 
of 150mm thickness of reinforced concrete o f C30/35 concrete to IS EN 206, or the 
provision of full concrete surround of C16/20 concrete to the pipe , as described in 
Section 4.7 , complete with flexible joints, where required, or the use of a ductile iron 
pipe in lieu of the original pipe material , provided there are no service connection in this 
length of pipe. These alterna tive protection measures shall extend  for the distance 
where the depth is below the limits  outlined above . A combination or a mix of all of 
these additional protection measures may be required  and are to be agreed with Irish 
Water . However, the primary app roach should be to provide the pipe with the required 
depth of cover as outlined above  in Section 3.9.1 to 3.9.6 .  
 
3.10 Roadway/Footway Surface  Reinstatement        
      
Roadway’s/footway’s surface finishes above the trench backfill and pipe granular 
surround material in new Development s shall be to the requirements of the Roads 
Authority in whose functional area the Development  is located and/or as outlined in the 
Planning Permission for the Development .  
 
Reinstatement of trench surfaces in existing Public Roads shall be to the requirements 
of the relevant Local Authority Roads Department’s Road Opening Licence, unless 
otherwise specified by Irish Water. This will require compliance with the “Guidelines for 
the Opening, Backfilling and Reinstatement of Trenches in Public Road s”, 2nd Edition, or 
subsequent amendments published by the Department of Transport, Tourism and 
Sport. 
 
The reinstatement of trenches on National Roads shall be in accordance with the TII 
“Specification for the Reinstatement of Openings in National Roads” or subsequent 
amendments published by Transport Infrastructure Ireland, unless otherwise specifie d. 
  
3.11 Access to the  Works   
 
Access structures to Works shall be located to minimise the risk of damage to buildings 
or other infrastructure s.  Such access points are generally provided by way of Manhole s 
or inspection chambers . Inspection chambers  (minimum 900mm X 900mm plan area or 
900mm diameter) may be provided as access points in the Works to be Vested in Irish 
Water in the case of small diameter Sewer s that are located at shallow depths (less 
than 900mm cover)  subject to Irish Water agreement . Private side inspection chambers 
on wastewater service connections are described separately in Section 3.11.14  below.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
51 
 Manhole s and inspection chambers shall b e designed  to: 
 
3.11.1  Provide reasonable access for equipment to carry out maintenance 
activities .  
3.11.2  Provide safe access and egress in accordance with Health and Safety 
Authority requirements  and in accordance with Health and Safety 
Legislation .  
3.11.3  Have a minimum clear access opening of 600 mm x 6 00 mm. (However, 
designers must have regard to safe access /egress requirements to Works  
by operatives with breathing apparatus in accordance with the Preliminary 
Safety and Health Plan as prepared by the Project Supervisor Design 
Process (PSDP) which must include requirements for a safe means of 
access and  egress ). 
3.11.4  Incorporate an access shaft in situations where the Manhole  is of deep 
construction, with a minimum clear access opening of 600mm x 6 00mm and 
minimum internal dimension of 1,200mm x 1,200mm , or 1,200mm 
diameter. .  
3.11.5  Incorporate a smooth flow invert/channel directing the wastewater from the 
inlet sewer(s) to the outlet sewer with  the change in flow direction between 
the inflow in any of the inlet sewers  and the outflow in the outlet sewer not 
exceed ing 90o when measured from a straight through line , i.e. the inlet flow 
in any inlet sewer should not run counter to the main flow direction in the 
channel.   
 
Access points to the Works shall  be located with due regard to public utility services, 
safety , security  and the provision of safe working areas . Access to shallow Sewer s via 
inspection chambers should be provided at maximum intervals of 45m. Access to 
Sewer s via Manhole s should be provided at maximum intervals of 90m for Sewer s of 
225mm diameter and above, and at maximum  intervals of 75m where the Sewer  size is 
150mm diameter, and shall be located in the following positions  
 
3.11.6  At all changes of pipe direction . 
3.11.7  At all changes of pipe gradient . 
3.11.8  At all changes of pipe material  along the Sewer  length .  
3.11.9  At all changes of pipe diameter . 
3.11.10  At the head of all Sewer s.  
3.11.11  At all Sewer  junctions of two or more pipes . 
3.11.12  At every junction of a Wastewater  Sewer  with another Sewer  serving 
three or  more properties where the access point is a Manhole . 
3.11.13  At the point of connection of the Works to the Network .  
 
In addition to the above, the following shall also be adhered to:  
 
3.11.14  An inspection chamber of precast concrete or blockwork construction 
(600mmX600mm plan area) or proprietary approved plastic units in 
accordance with EN  13598 -2 shall be installed on the Drain on the IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
52 
 private side of the boundary of a Premises at or within 1.0m upstream of 
the Premise Boundary  to allow access to  the private Drain  and the 
downstream service connection  (see additional  provisions below)  , 
3.11.15  The renewal, maintenance and repair of Drains and associated 
Accessories  upstream of the boundary of the Premises is the  
responsibility of the property owner and shall be constructed in 
accordance with the Building Regulations subject to the provision of an 
inspection chamber as above.  
 
Access points ( Manhole s and chambers) shall be located so that they are accessible 
and apparent to the maintainer at all times for use. They shall avoid rear gardens or 
enclosed locations and they shall never be overlain wi th surface dressing, topsoil, etc. 
Additional access points may be provided in other locations, as long as access is 
provided to the system from other access points.  A safe working space shall be 
provided and maintained at all times around the Sewer access  points.   
 
With respect to the private side inspection chamber referred to in Section 3.11.14  
above the following additional provisions will apply:  
 
 Inspection chamber s, where possible,  shall be located within 1m o n the private 
side of property boundary.  The maximum depth at this location shall be 1.20 m. 
 Irish Water may facilitate or accommodate a relocation of the inspection chamber 
where the anticipated or design depth at that location is greater that 1.20 meters. 
In these instances the chamber may be r elocated or moved back towards the 
dwelling until a depth of 1.20m is achieved , provided the distance of the 
inspection chamber from the boundary of the Premises does not exceed 2.0m  
(achieving the 1.20m depth determines the final location for the inspection 
chamber). This will be subject to I rish Water approval in all instances  and shall 
only apply to specific locations  within a Development. It should not be assumed 
that once approval for the relocation is granted  that it applies to all dwellings 
within the respective Self Lay Development.  Where it is envisaged that there is a 
justifiable engineering reason for re -locating the inspection chambers to achieve 
the maximum depth of 1.2, Developers shall indicate on a layout plan the location 
and applica ble house numbers within the development where this applies. 
Relaxation reviews will be assessed on the basis of this submission.  
 If the depth of the service connection exceeds 1.2m a Manhole  (minimum 
900mm X 900mm plan area or 900mm diameter) shall be provided.  
 A proprietary inspection chamber may be used provided the minimum internal 
chamber dimension is either 600 mm x 600mm or 600mm diameter irrespective of 
depth (up to 1.20 meters). The u se of proprietary units is subject to I rish Water’s  
requirements in all instances . 
 Where there is a justifiable engineering reason  such as a physical space 
restriction  or constraint , Irish Water may allow the installation of smaller 
inspecti on chambers than the 600mm  square or circular units for depths up to 1. 0 
meters. The dimension of these smaller units shall not be less than 450mm 
(square or circular). These are subject to specific I rish Water approval in all IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
53 
 instances  and shall only apply to specifi c locations within a Development.  It 
should not be assumed that once approval is granted for the smaller sized units 
that this applies to all dwellings within the respective Self Lay Development. 
Were it is envisaged that there is a justifiable engineering  reason such as a 
physical restriction or constraint for downsizing the foul inspection chambers, 
Developers shall indicate on a layout plan, the location and applicable house 
numbers within the development where this applies. Relaxation reviews will be 
assessed on the basis of this submission . 
 In high density developments i.e. Duplex or Terraced housing, wastewater drains 
from a maximum of two units can be combined into one inspection chamber in 
instances where there are space constraints.  
 In high density developments, an inspection chamber shall be located within 
1.0m of the private boundary where possible. However, in instances where the 
property does not have a garden or private parking space (within the curtilage of 
the property), the inspection chamber  should be located in the footway, or, in 
parking area immediately outside the property subject to approval by Irish Water. 
In these instances, the inspection chamber should be positioned so as to avoid 
frequent wheel loading from vehicles.  
 Covers and fram es shall be suitable for the relevant road and traffic conditions 
and provided in accordance with IS EN 124 . 
 Long radius bends , up to 45 degrees , may be installed on the 100mm service 
connection downstream of the private side inspection chambers to facilit ate the 
transition from horizontal to vertical to allow the service connection to connect to 
the branch connection on the Network , in accordance with the requirements of 
Section 3.5.12 .       
 
3.12 Manhole s  
 
3.12.1  General  
 
Manhole s should generally be provided as the means of access to the Works  and 
particularly where.  
 
3.12.1.1  the depth from the surface to the crown of the pipe is greater than 900m m. 
3.12.1.2  there are two or more upstream pipes each serving more than one 
propert y. or 
3.12.1.3  the distance between Manhole s would otherwise be greater than 90 m for 
Sewer s of 225mm diameter and above, and 75m where the Sewer  size is 
150mm diameter .  
  
At the head of sewer lengths, i nspection chamber access , of 900mm diameter or of 
900mm  by 900mm plan area, may be acceptable where the pipe is of small diameter, 
the depth to invert of this pipe is less than 900mm and no part of the pipe is more than 
22.5 m from the adjacent access point .  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
54 
 Manhole  covers and frames  to IS EN 124, with D400 load capacity, should be used 
where Manhole s and inspection chambers are located on roads. If the Manhole  location 
is on a carriageway, a cover with a higher load bearing capacity than the standard IS 
EN 124, D400 cover, should be used. Covers with E600 rating should be used in 
heavily trafficked roads, as required on a case by case assessment basis.   
 
A Manhole , in general, shall not be located in carriageway situations where traffic 
frequency and loading is anticipated to be high (e.g., in industrial developments where 
large numbers of HGV vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 7.5 tonnes are 
expected) than would occur on a typical residential estate distributor road.  
 
Manhole s are to be fitted with step rungs or fixed l adders as required depending on the 
depth of the Manhole  and to allow safe self egress. Step rungs are to be provided in 
Manhole s where the depth from ground to the soffit of the pipe is  up to 3.0m. Fixed 
ladders are required in Manhole s where the depth fr om ground to the soffit of the pipe 
exceeds a depth of 3.0m and up to 6.0m . A site specific engineering solution shall be 
provided to Irish Water for review and approval for access arrangements in Manhole s 
where the depth between ground and the soffit of t he pipe exceeds 6.0m.  
 
Site specific risks are to be assessed relating to access to and egress from Manhole s 
during construction as well as during the operational phase and design mitigation 
measures implemented as required. Adequate safe working space sh all be provided 
and maintained around all Manholes and inspection chambers. All Manhole  entry and 
egress is to be carried out using a safety access plan incorporating the use of safety 
equipment, tri -pod and winch. The designer must ensure that the general  principles of 
prevention, as well as relevant Health and Safety legislation, are taken into account 
when selecting Manhole  covers and frames in respect of manual handling, opening size 
for access, egress and rescue, etc. Proprietary lifting equipment for covers should be 
provided to allow safe lifting of covers and this should be consistent to avoid risk of 
accident due to misuse.    
 
Backdrop Manhole s shall be provided where there is a differential in depth between the 
incoming and outgoing Sewer  inverts of 600mm or more. These backdrop Manhole s 
shall be provided with a horizontal rodding eye internally. Where the back drop from the 
Sewer  is constructed at right angles to the vertical plane or where the drop exceeds 
900mm, a vertical rodding pipe from ground level, complete with a surface cover and 
frame to IS 261, etc., shall be provided.  Where there is a differential in depth between 
the incoming and outgoing Sewer inverts of less than 600mm, a cascade Manhole shall 
be provided to Irish Water’s r equirements or the benching shall be pro filed to ensure a 
smooth flow f rom the inlet to the outlet pipe .   
 
Manhole s shall be constructed of the following materials:  
 
3.12.1.4 In situ concrete, C 30/37 , in accordance with IS EN 206 , 20mm aggregate 
size, in accordance with IS EN 12620 , with a minimum wall and floor 
thickness of 225mm for Manhole  depths up to 3.0m and 300mm or more IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
55 
 when the Manhole  depth exceeds 3.0m, complete with a cast in situ 
concrete roof slab, minimum thickness of 225mm, depending on Manhole  
dimensions, reinforced with high tensile steel bar reinforcement, with a 
minimum 40mm concrete cover.  
3.12.1.5  Precast concrete Manhole s shall only be provided where the water table is 
low. They shall not be used where there is a perched water table , where 
the Sewer is located next to a river, lake or other water body and within 
areas that are identified by the Office of Public Works Catchment Flood 
Risk Assessment and Management (CFRAM) with a flood risk of 1 in 10 
years.  The precast wall units shall be provided with rubber sealing ring 
gasket s between units, complying with the requirements of IS EN 1917 
and IS 420 , subject to specific approval of Irish Water, complete with a 
150mm minimum thickness cast in situ formed concrete surround, C 20/25, 
in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with 
IS EN 12620 . The precast concrete Manhole  shall have either a pre-cast 
concrete (150mm minimum thickness beneath channel) or a cast in -situ 
concrete base (225mm minimum thickness beneath  channel) . It shall be 
also provided with either a pre-cast (160mm minimum thickness)  or cast 
in-situ concrete roof slab ( 225mm minimum thickness). B oth the base and 
roof slab shall be constructed of C 30/37 concrete , in accordance with IS 
EN 206, 20mm aggregate size , in accordance with IS EN 12620 , 
reinforced with high tensile steel bar reinforcement, wit h a minimum 40mm 
concrete cover. The concrete surround to the precast concrete wall units 
shall only be omitted if the Manhole  ring has a wall thicknes s of 125mm or 
more and where a proprietary watertight sealing system is provided as a n 
integral part of the Manhole  wall system  up to a maximum depth of 4.0m. 
The omission of the concrete surround shall only apply if the wall unit is 
not penetrated through with proprietary fixings which could result in the 
water tightness of the unit being compromised.   
3.12.1.6  High density, high strength  (20N/mm2), solid concrete block work walls 
only in circumst ances where the depth of the Sewer  is less than 1,200mm 
(the use of block work in deeper Manhole s will be considered but such use 
will require detailed structural design and agreement with Irish Water). The 
blocks shall be bedded  in mortar, minimum M 20 strength to IS EN  998-
Part 2. Block work , complying with the requirements of  IS EN 771 – Part 
3, shall be flush pointed and not plastered internally, with internal lining of 
solid engineering brick to IS EN 771  – Part 3  to a height of 1.0m above the 
bench ing, bonded to the concrete block work . The block walls to be  
supported on a 225mm thick concrete floor with a reinforced concrete roof 
of 225mm  minimum thickness, both cast with in -situ C30/37 concrete,  in 
accordance with IS EN 206 , 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS 
EN 12620, reinforced with high tensile steel bar reinforcement, with a 
minimum 40mm concrete cover.  
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
56 
 3.12.2  Manhole  Dimensions  
 
Manhole  Dimensions depend  on the size of the main Sewer  and the number of pipes 
accommodated in the Manhole . The design size shall permit safe access  and egress  
without unduly restricting operating space. All Manhole s shall have a minimum internal 
clear dimension of 1,200mm on Manhole s up to 3m depth. The internal dimensions of 
Manhole s will vary with the pipe size, the number of pipes entering the Manhole , the 
direction of entry of the pipes relative to the outlet pipe, the variation in depth between 
the inlet and outlet pipes and the depth of the Manhole  itself. Manhole s shall have an 
open channel (s) allowing smooth flow between the inlet pipe(s) and the exit pipe. A 
safety chain shall be fitted on the downstream pipe where it exceeds 450mm  diameter , 
subject to health and safety requirements. Manhole  dimensions shall be in accordance 
with IS EN 752 .  
 
As a guide, the following nominal internal dimensions of Manhole s will apply  
Nominal diameter of largest pipe in 
Manhole  (mm)  Minimum nominal internal 
dimension of Manhole  (mm)  
Less than 375  1200  
375 - 450  1350   
 
The internal dimensions shown above of the Manhole s are minimum  dimensions and 
shall be  increased to accommodate bends and multiple inlet layouts  to ensure safe 
working area . It should be noted that this Code of Practice relates to pipe sizes of 
450mm diam eter and below. Larger diameter Sewer  sizes are outside the scope of this 
document.   
 
3.12.3 Manhole  Bases   
 
Manhole  bases shall be constructed of cast in situ C30/37 concrete, in accordance with 
IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620, with a minimum 
thickness of 225mm. Thicker Manhole  bases are required for Sewer s in excess of 3m 
deep or where the Manhole  size is greater  than the standard minimum size outlined 
above.  Alternatively, precast concrete bases may be used, incorporating invert 
channels, benching, etc. in compliance with IS EN 1917 and IS 420 , with the base 
thickness beneath the channel shall be at lease 150mm . Where precast concrete rings 
are used with cast -in-situ concrete bases, the bottom ring unit shall be cas t into the 
base slab to ensure adequate  sealing of the wall/base junction. The Manhole base shall 
be founded on a 75mm layer of C12/15 concrete, in ac cordance with IS EN 206, 20mm 
aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620.  
 
3.12.4 Manhole  Walls   
 
Manhole  Walls shall be constructed of cast in situ concrete, C30/37 concrete, in 
accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN  12620,  
with a minimum thickness of 225mm. Thicker Manhole  walls  are required for Sewer s in IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
57 
 excess of 3m deep where the size is greater than the standard minimum size.  Cast in 
situ concrete Manhole s shall be used in all locations where there is a perched w ater 
table, where the Sewer is located next to a river, lake or other water body and within 
areas that are identified by the Office of Public Works Catchment Flood Risk 
Assessment and Management (CFRAM) with a flood risk of 1 in 10 years. Alternatively, 
precast concrete ring units shall only be used where the water table is low. The precast 
concrete  units shall comply with the requirements of IS EN 1917 and IS 420 , complete 
with a cast in situ formed concrete  surround of 150mm minimum thickness of  C20/25, 
20mm aggregate size.  The concrete surround to the precast concrete wall units shall 
only be omitted if the Manhole  ring has a wall thickness of 125mm or more and where a 
proprietary watertight sealing system is provided as an integral part of the Manhole  wall 
system , up to a maximum depth of 4.0m.  The omission of the concrete surround  shall 
only apply if the wall unit is not penetrated through with proprietary fixings which could 
result in the water tightness of the unit being compromised. In shallow Manhole s, less 
than 1.2m deep, high density , high strength (20N/mm2), solid concrete block work walls 
may be used. The blocks shall be bedded in mortar, minimum M20 strength to IS EN  
998-Part 2.  
 
3.12.5 Manhole  Roofs   
 
Manhole  roofs should consist of a reinforced  concrete slab of i n situ C30/37 concrete, in 
accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620,  
with a minimum thickness of 225mm , designed to carry all live and dead loads. 
Alternatively, precast concrete roof slabs , with a m inimum thickness of 160mm,  may be 
used in compliance with IS EN 1917 and IS 420.  This approach would be the preferable 
option where pre -cast concrete ring units are used as Manhole  walls. An access 
opening shall be formed in the Manhole  roof slabs. The min imum dimensions of the roof 
opening shall be 6 00mm by 6 00mm or 600mm diameter . Circular Manhole  openings of 
600mm d iameter may be used if the Manhole  cover is circular.  The opening in the roof 
slab shall be formed over the benching with the widest width at invert level.   
 
3.12.6 Manhole  Inverts  and Benching   
 
Manhole  inverts should be fitted with smooth flow channels to accommodate the flow 
from the inlet pipe(s) to the  outlet pipe. For straight through Manhole s, with similar size 
inlet and outlet Sewer s, an open channel or half round pipe section, bedded in cement 
sand mortar, may be used. Otherwise, the Manhole  invert should be formed with cast in 
situ concrete , C25/30  concrete, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in 
accordance with IS EN 12620,  finished with a 1:3 cement sand mortar. Alternatively, 
pre-cast concrete bases, incorporating pre -formed channels and benching, may be 
used. Such units shall be i n accordance with the provisions of IS EN 1917 and IS 420 . 
Where pre -cast concrete Manhole  inverts units, with multiple channels, are used, any 
redundant channels shall be blanked by scabbling the channel surfaces, filling with 
C25/30 concrete and finishing the surface to match the existing invert. Where there is 
more than one incoming Sewer discharging to the Manhole , the benching shall be so 
shaped as to guide the flow in the direction of the outgoing Sewer. The benching shall IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
58 
 be bro ught up vertically at the flow channel to the level of the crown of the incoming 
Sewer . The benching shall slope away from the vertical edge at a slope of 1:30. The 
soffit crowns of the incoming and outgoing Sewer s shall be kept at the same level. The 
flow channel shall be sloped gradually and evenly between the incoming and outgoing 
Sewer . Staggered toe -hole rebates, 200mm wide x 150mm high x 150mm deep, shall 
be provided in vertical invert benching at 300mm ce ntres in channels of sewers of 
450mm and great er to allow access from the benching to the channel invert.   
 
3.12.7 Manhole  Shafts   
 
Manhole  shafts are required in deep Manhole s where the Manhole plan dimensions are 
in excess of 1,200mm x 1,200mm plan area or 1,200mm diameter.  The distance 
between the top of the benching and the soffit of the main roof slab supporting the shaft 
structure should be not less than 2.1m. The minimum internal dimensions of the access 
shaft shall be 1,200m by 1,200mm , or 1,200mm diameter . The correspon ding opening 
in the main chamber roof slab shall be at least 1,2 00m by 1,200mm , or 1,200mm 
diameter . The walls shall be formed in reinforced C30/37 concrete, in accordance with 
IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620,  cast monolithic  with 
the main chamber roof slab. The minimum thickness of the shaft walls shall be 225mm . 
The supporting roof slab shall be formed in reinforced C30/37 concrete, in accordance 
with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620,  and shall be 
225mm  thick.  Alternatively, approved precast concrete ring units complying with the 
requirements of IS EN 1917 and IS 420 , may be used as Manhole  shafts, complete with 
a cast in situ concrete formed surround of 150mm minimum thickness of C 20/25 
concrete, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS 
EN 12620 .  
 
3.12.8 Rocker Pipes   
 
Rocker pipes shall be provided for rigid pipe at the entry to and exit from Manhole s to 
form a flexible joint upstream and downstream of the Manhole  structure . The length of 
rigid pipe stub that is built into the Manhole  wall shall extend no further than  600mm 
from the inner face of the Manhole  wall. The length of the next pipe, the rocke r pipe, 
shall be varied in relation to the pipe diameter with lengths of 600mm for pipes of 
150mm to 600mm diameter . This Code of Practice  relates to pipe size up to 450mm . 
Where the pipeline is installed in ground which is varied or unstable, multiple roc ker 
pipes may be required. If flexible pipes are being used, rocker pipes are not required .  
 
3.12.9 Manhole  Covers and Frames   
 
Manhole  covers and frames shall comply with IS EN 124  and BS 7903 and be of 
suitable load grade , Class D400 (or E600 for heavy trafficked roads, as required on a 
case by case assessment basis)  with a clear access opening of 600mm (square or 
circular) . Covers shall be selected and designed to prevent the cover unit (s) falling into 
the chamber. Covers and frames shall be designed to  be safely lifted with minimal risk 
of manual handling injury, suitable for use with lifting equipment and arranged to ensure IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
59 
 rescue procedures are not impeded. Frames should be square or circular with a square 
or circular insert with a minimum clear opening of 600mm diameter /dimension . Class 
D400 shall either have a 100mm or a 150mm deep frame and Class E600 covers on 
heavily trafficked roads shall have a 150mm deep frame . All covers shall be of non -rock 
design  and closed keyways shall be provided in each cover.  Manhole  covers may be 
single units or double triangular , the double triangular units shall incorporate a closed 
key in each unit. Hinged Manhole  covers shall incorporate a locking mechanism to keep 
the unit upright when open.  Third Party Certification shall be provided for all Manhole  
covers and frames.   
 
Manhole  covers shall be set in position flush with the finished ground surface, whether 
road, pavement or open ground  and shall have clear working space around the 
opening . The frame cover should be supported on Class B solid engineering brick , 
215mm in width, to IS EN 771  – Part 2 , one course minimum and no more than a 
maximum of three courses in height, set in mortar, minimum M30 strength to IS EN  998-
Part 2:2010. Alternatively, pre -cast reinforced concrete seating rings set in mortar as 
above and of similar depth to brick courses and of similar concrete strength as the 
Manhole  units may be used instead of brick where precast Manhole  units and roof slabs 
are used. The Manhole  cover frame shall be set in rapid hardening cementitious, epoxy 
resin or polyester resin mortar. The mortar shall have a minimum working time of 15 
minutes and shall reach a minimum compressive  strength of 30 N/mm2 and min imum 
tensile strength of 5 N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing. Standard concrete blocks or bricks 
shall not be permitted. The cover frame should be installed and set to the 
manufacturer’s instructions.  The finish of the road surface around the Chamber cover 
and frame shall be to the requirements of the relevant Roads Authority for the area.   
 
3.12.10 Manhole  Steps  
 
Manhole  steps shall b e provided in Manhole s where the depth  from ground to soffit of 
the sewer does not exceed  3.0m and in shallow chambers. Manhole  steps shall comply 
with the requirements of IS EN 13101 , Type D, Class 1 . Galvanised mild steel step 
rungs, 20mm diameter, shall be provided with plastic encapsulated finish. Steps rungs 
shall be 300mm wide and located 300mm apart vertically. The vertical  distance between 
the top of the Manhole  cover and the first step in the Manhole  shall not exceed 675mm. 
The distance between the bottom step and the benching shall not exceed 300mm. All 
step irons shall be centred under the access opening in the Manhole  roof slab. The 
centre face of the step rung shall be 120mm from the wall face within the Manhole  to 
align it with the roof slab opening.    
 
3.12.11 Ladders   
 
Ladders are to be provided in Manhole s where the depth  from ground level to soffit of 
the sewer pipe  exce eds of 3.0m. Such f ixed ladders within Manhole s shall comply with 
IS EN 14396 . The vertical distance between the top of the Manhole  cover and the first 
step in the Manhole  shall not exceed 675mm. The distance between the bottom ladder 
rung and the benching shall not exceed 300mm. All ladders shall be centred under the IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
60 
 access opening in the Manhole  roof slab. Ladders , where provided,  shall be 
manufactured of low carbon steel complying with IS EN 100 25 with hot dipped 
galvanised finish to IS EN ISO 1461, with at lease 100 micron galvanise thickness . 
Ladder stringers shall be 65mm x 12mm, 300mm apart with 20mm diameter solid rungs 
at 300mm centres. Ladder stringers should be adequately supported from the Manhole  
walls at intervals of not more than 1.5m. Stringers should be bolted to the support cleats 
to facilitate renewal. Alternatively, s tainless steel fixed  ladders may be required in 
accordance with Irish Water’s requirements . These shall be fabricated from Grade 
X5CrNiMo 17 -12-2 steel complying with IS EN 10088 -3. Aluminium ladders shall not be 
provided.  The base of all ladder s shall be positioned on a horizontal landing platform.  
The tops of ladders shall be provided with proprietary fixings to extend the ladder above 
ground level , if deemed necessary . The centre line of the ladder rung shall be 150mm 
from the wall face within  the Manhole  to align it w ith the roof slab opening. Manhole s in 
excess of 6m depth shall be the subject of a detailed design submission for agreement 
with Irish Water in advance of construction. The Manholes shall be provided with 
intermediate landing platform(s)  as part of an engineered access solution  and full details 
of the landing platform shall also be provided for agreement with Irish Water . Access to 
Manhole s is regarded as confined space a ccess and shall be subject to a s afety access 
plan.    
 
3.13 Gravity S ewer  Pipe Material Types   
 
The types and fittings outlined herein shall be used in the construction of the Gravity 
Sewers . Pipe material shall not change between Manhole s. The list below does not 
apply to pipes installed by pipe jacking or micro tunnelling.  
 
3.13.1  Concrete. Concrete Sewer  pipes with spigot and socket joints and rubber 
ring fittings shall comply with IS EN 1916  (2002) , BS 5911 , Part 1  (2002 – 
2010)  and IS 6 (2004) or equivalent standard, strength Class 120 with 
minimum crushing loads in accordance with Table 8 of BS 5911 -1 (2002 -
2010) . All pipes and fittings shall have gasket type joints of spigot and socket 
or rebated form. (Pipe diameters 225mm an d above)  
3.13.2  Thermoplastic Structured Wall Pipes. Thermoplastic structured wall pipes  
shall comply with the provisions of IS EN 13476 (2007/2009) . Pipes shall be 
of Stiffness Class 8kN/m2 (SN8) and to be capable of demonstrating a jetting 
resistance of 2,600  psi (180 Bar) without damage when tested in accordance 
with Section 3.3 of WIS 4 -35-01 (2008) . (Sewer  diameters 150mm up to 
450mm , Service Connections of 100mm diameter ). Pipe fittings of Stiffness 
Class 4kN/m2 (SN4) stiffness class, complying to IS EN 13476, will be 
acceptable if SN8 stiffness class fittings are not manufactured by the pipe 
manufacturer . 
3.13.3  Unplasticised PVC. Unplasticised PVC pipes shall comply with the 
provisions IS EN 1401 2009/2012. Pipes to be appl ication area code “UD”, 
Stiffness Class 8kN/m2 (SN8).  Provision for jetting shall be based on the 
WRc Sewer Jetting Code of Practice, June 1997. Pipes to be capable of 
resisting a maximum jetting pump pressure of 2,600psi (180 Bar) without IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
61 
 damage. (Sewer d iameters 150mm up to 450mm, Service Connections of 
100mm diameter) . Pipe fittings of SN4 stiffness class, complying to IS EN 
1401, will be acceptable if SN8 stiffness class fittings are not manufactured 
by the pipe manufacturer .   
3.13.4  Other. The use of alterna tive pipe types and materials will require the prior 
written agreement of Irish Water.  
 
3.14 Rising Main  Pipe Material Types   
 
The pipes types and fittings outlined herein shall be used in the construction of Rising 
Main s. Pipe material shall not change along the Rising Main  length.  
 
3.14.1  Ductile Iron. Ductile iron pipes and fittings for Wastewater  shall comply with 
the requirements of IS EN 598. The pipes and fittings shall be cement lined 
internally and zinc coated with an approved bituminous coating externally. 
Ductile iron pipes may require plastic sheeting protection in adverse ground 
condit ions in accordance with BS 6076 . 
3.14.2  Polyethyle ne. Polyethylene pipe and fittings for Wastewater  shall comply 
with the requirements of IS EN 12201. Polyethylene fittings, including fusion 
joints and electro -fusion fittings, shall comply with the provisions of IS EN 
12201 – Part 3  
 
Polyethylene pipes sh all also conform to the following UK Water  Industry Specification 
documents   
 
 WIS 4-32-08 – Specification for the Fusion Jointing of Polyethylene 
Pressure Pipeline Systems Using PE80 and PE100 materials.  
 IGN 4-32-18 – The Choice of Pressure Rating for Polyethylene Pipe 
Systems for Water Supply and Sewer age Duties . 
 IGN 4 -01-03 – Pressure Testing of Pressure Pipes and Fittings for use by 
Public Water Supplies.  
 
3.15 Rising Main  Discharge (Header) Manhole        
 
A Rising Main  discharge Manhole , or a header Manhole , shall be provided at the 
discharge point of a Rising Main . This Manhole  shall be set off from the Network  and it 
shall be linked to the Network  by a length of Gravity Sewer  of appropriate size to carry 
the Rising Main  maximum pumped flow. The Gravity Sewer  shall be connected into the 
Network  at a Manhole  when the Rising Main  flow is from a Type 1, 2 or 3 Pumping 
Station (See Part 5). In the case of low flow discharge volumes, the connection of the 
Gravity Sewer  to the Network  may be provided by a branch connection.  
 
The header Manhole  shall be constructed in either cast in -situ concrete or pre -cast 
concrete rings , both as described above in Section 3.1 2 above. The header Manhole  
shall be provided complete with base, roof slab, roof access opening and cover/frame. 
The rising main pipe shall terminate outside the wall of the header Manhole  with a IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
62 
 stub/rocker pipe arrangemen t, a straight length of pipe and a flexible coupling. The 
straight length of rocker pipe  shall be connected by a flexible coupling to a length of 
plain/flanged ductile iron pipe, which shall be built into the wall of the Manhole , complete 
with a puddle flange. The flanged end of this flanged/plain pipe, located w ithin the 
Manhole , shall be fitted with a 90 degree all flanged bend and a flanged bell -mouth to 
allow the rising main to discharge vertically within the Manhole . 
 
The invert of the Manhole  shall be provided with internal benching formed to allow the 
Risin g Main  discharge volume to be directed to the outlet gravity discharge Sewer . The 
benching shall be formed to ensure a smooth flow transition between the Rising Main  
bell-mouth discharge and the outlet Sewer . The Manhole  invert shall be formed with 
cast in situ concrete , C25/30, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in 
accordance with IS EN 12620, and finished with a 1:3 cement sand mortar , perfectly 
smooth . The benching shall slope at a gradient of 1:10 from  the bell -mouth.  
 
In all areas, the header Manhole  shall be provided with a 100mm diameter vent pipe 
linked to a vent stack  and it shall be fitted with a sealed manhole cover and frame . The 
vent pipe shall be built into the wall of the Manhole  at a high level and sea led watertight 
within the wall. It shall be connected to a free -standing vent column or vent stack. A 
passive activated carbon filter shall be provided to the vent column/stack. The activated 
carbon filter shall be of robust proprietary manufacture and sized to have a minimum 
retention time of 3 seconds at maximum flow -rate.  
 
3.16 Pipe Joints  
 
3.16.1 General  
 
Pipe joints shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements  for the pipe 
material. Pipe joints will generally be one of the following:  
 
 Push in rubber ring joint.  
 Bolted flanged joint.  
 Flexible mechanical coupling with p rotective coating.   
 Fusion welded joints  where the site fusion jointing shall be strictly in 
accordance with UK WIS 4 -32-08, 2016  (Specification for Fusion Jointing 
of Polyethylene Pressure Pipeline Systems Using PE80 and PE100 
Materials ) and with BS ISO 21307:2017 (Plastic Pipes and Fittings – Butt 
Fusion Jointing Procedures for Polyethylene (PE) Piping Systems .  
 Equipment used for butt fusion and electrofusion welding shall be in 
accordance with BS ISO 12176 (Plastic Pipe Fittings – Equipment for 
Fusion Jointing Polyethylene Pipe Systems  – Part 1 Butt Fusion, Part 2 
Electro Fusion ). 
 Equipment used for butt fusion and electrofusion welding shall have CE 
Certification and shall be calibrated on a 6 -monthly basis.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
63 
 Bolted flanged joint s shall have raised face flanges complete with nuts and bolts to IS 
EN ISO 898 and double metal washers to BS 4320. Nuts, bolts and washers to be 
protected against corrosion in accordance with WIS 4 -52-03. Flange assemblies, 
including nuts, bolts, washers a nd gaskets to be designed to meet a working and test 
pressure of 16 bar and 2 4 bar respectively.   
 
All pipes and joints will be subjected to appropriate pressure tests as outlined in 
Section 4.10  and Section 4.11  below.  
 
3.16.2 Jointing of Polyethylene Pipes  
 
In advance of commencing pipe installation on site, the Developer shall provide a 
specific m ethod statement to the Irish Water field engineer for review /assessment  
outlining the butt fusion and electrof usion jointing  processes for polyethylene pipes  that 
will be carried out on site. This shall b e additional to the requirements for Method 
Related Statements as set out in Section 2.3.16 above. . 
 
The Developer shall adopt and follow any and all applicable quality control procedures 
for all joints on polyethylene pipes  for both butt fusion  and electrofusion a s well as for  
mechanical  jointing systems . In addition, the Developer shall also follow the 
manufacturer’s requirements  but these shall not take precedence over good site 
practices .  
 
Butt fusion a nd electro fusion jointing of polyethylene pipes shall only be carried out by 
appropriately trained and experienced operatives in possession of a current relevant 
Training Certificate. Training should be certified and equivalent to City and Guilds 
qualific ations. Jointing personnel sh all have , and be able to confirm, a minimum of one 
year’s experience in successfully completing pipe welding under “live” construction 
conditions. Jointing shall be completed using fully automatic or pre -approved jointing 
machi ne/rigs in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In relation to electro 
fusion jointing, the jointing machine shall incorporate a remote inspection/monitoring 
system, which allows for real time inspection of the weld integrity or a data download  
facility. The identity of the polyethylene (PE80, PE100) pipeline manufacturer shall be 
made known to Irish Water prior to commencement of the installation. Certification and 
testing (including independent third party certification) shall be provided to confirm 
quality assurance compliance. Each joint shall be clearly marked with the joint logged 
automatically on the jointing machine  in a format to the satisfaction of the Irish Water 
field engineer. . A printout of the joint details, with an as -built drawi ng complete with GPS 
location and geo -located photograph of each joint, shall be provided and retained for 
quality assurance purposes. In addition to the data log report, the welders own record / 
ledger must also be maintained and provided as part of the q uality assurance 
documentation.   All fusion welds shall be undertaken in an enclosure (e.g. tent) to 
minimise the effects of wind and rain on the jointing process and to prevent 
contamination from wind borne dust. All personnel carrying out pipe jointing s hall have 
appropriate training in health and safety and shall follow all safety procedures laid down 
for welding.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
64 
  
 3.16. 3 Auditing and Testing of Polyethylene Pipe Joints  
 
Each installation team and welding equipment unit will be audited by the Irish Water 
field engineer prior to commencement of welding on site and on a regular basis 
thereafter. Where it is deemed necessary by the field engineer, Irish Water may require 
or instruct the Developer to procure an audit from an independent accredited auditor. 
The audit reports from this independent auditor shall be provided to the Irish Water field 
engineer on a regular basis. Each installation and welding team shall also be audit ed by 
the Developer’s Construction Engineer on a weekly basis or more frequently if required 
by the Irish Water field engineer. All of these audits will use a standard checklist to 
ensure that all the correct equipment and working practices are being utili sed. 
Weekly equipment checks and regular supervision of the welding equipment shall be 
carried out by the Developer and reports on these checks will be inspected by the Irish 
Water f ield engineer.   
 
The destructive weld testing and analysis shall be carried out by a specialist and 
accredited testing organisation  who will take the samples, deliver the sample for testing, 
test the joint and report on the result, thus ensuring that a chain of custody is 
maintained on all test samples.  The Developer’s con tractor shall provide details of his 
proposed testing organisation to the Irish Water f ield engineer for review and approval 
prior to any testing being undertaken.  
 
Joint tests complying with WIS 4 -32-08, (2016) shall be carried out for each pipe 
diameter containing electro fusion welds used by the Developer’s contractor’s personnel 
and welded by the equipment to be used for Works. These shall be in accordance with 
ISO 13954 for assembly socket fittings > 90mm, in accordance with ISO 13955 for 
assembly sock et fittings < 90mm and in accordance with ISO 13956 for saddle 
assemblies . Where possible, a t least 6 strips should be taken from a welded coupler for 
testing  with a lower number of strips taken for smaller diameter units. S amples shall be 
cut from each end of the joint spaced at equidistant intervals around the joint 
circumference. Similarly, joint tests complying with WIS 4 -32-08, (2016) (in accordance 
with ISO 13953) shall be carried out for each pipe diameter containing b utt fusion welds 
used by the Contractor’s personnel and welded by the equipment to be used for Works. 
The tests shall be undertaken by an independent laboratory accredited by the Irish 
National Accreditation Board or equivalent. Reports , in a format accept able to Irish 
Water,  on these tests shall be provided to the Irish Water field engineer for review.  
 
Prior to the commencement of polyethylene pipe laying works, pipe joint sample testing 
shall be carried out for all pipe sizes to be used in the Works. On e initial sample  test 
butt-fusion weld per designated butt -fusion crew and one initial sample test electro -
fusion weld per designated electro -fusion crew shall be cut and taken for testing. These 
shall be taken for each pipe size per designated crew on pip es that are to form part of 
the Works.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
65 
 During the installation of pipework, b utt fusion welds and electro -fusion welds shall be 
cut out from the polyethylene pipes associated with the Works completed and shall be 
subjected to a destructive test, in accordance with the test procedures in WIS 4 -32-08 
(2016), as outlined above. The weld joint chosen for testing will be as indicated by the 
Irish Water field engineer.   All weld  sample s shall be clearly labelled and referenced. 
The rate of testing of th e joints shall be as follows:  
 
 A minimum of one butt -fusion weld per designated butt-fusion crew per week and 
one electrofusion weld per designated electrofusion crew per week shall be cut 
out from the polyethylene pipes associated with the Works and tested. This 
minimum frequency of destructive testing shall be increased as directed by the 
field engineer if recurrent failure rates occur or if issues arise from auditing of 
welding crews and equipment. The sample test frequency is additional to the 
works te st frequency outlined above . 
 In addition to the initial and weekly weld joint testing outlined above, testing of the 
installed pipe joints shall be undertaken on joints as selected by the Irish Water 
field engineer. The frequency of joints testing on the p olyethylene pressure main 
that has been installed in the Works shall be at least one test per 30 joints made 
on site, with a minimum of five tests in smaller developments, or as directed by 
the field engineer. The test joint shall be chosen at random by th e Irish Water 
field engineer.  
 
All test s shall be carried out at the expense of the Developer and this shall include for all 
costs associated with the taking of, testing, analysis of and transportation of samples as 
well as the required reporting of the test results. All costs associated with aud iting shall 
also be at the expense of the Developer.  
 
The Contractor shall arrange for the selected installed joint samples to be tested in 
accordance with WIS 4 -32-08, IS EN 12201 – Part 5,  and with ISO 13953, IS O 13954, 
ISO 13955 and ISO 13956 (as appropriate and listed above) by an accredited 
laboratory ( accreditation by the Irish National Accreditation Board or e quivalent) and a 
test report , in a format required by Irish Water,  shall be provided to Irish Water’s field 
inspectors within 1 week of the sample joint being taken.   The report should indicate the 
test result , the failure mode of samples (Wasted Specimens), the specific joint 
identification data (Welders Name, Joint Number, Weld Date, Machine I.D, Date that the 
sample joi nt was received by Testing Facility) on the test report and results, along with 
clear photos of the joints prior to sampling with the I rish Water field  engineer ’s signature 
present on the pipe, photos of the tested wasted specimens and in addition particul ar 
photos of any individual wasted specimens that were classified as a failure.   
Where welds have failed , the Contractor shall excavate, cut out, and provide the welds 
carried out immediately before and immediately after the failed joint for additional 
testing.  
 
The Contractor shall note that if the results of any of the se two additional weld tests 
indicate that a weld is not in compliance with WIS 4 -32-08, i.e. a weld failure, then the IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
66 
 Developer shall be required, at his/her own expense, t o remove and replace all welds 
from the date of the last verifiable weld test found to be in compliance with WIS 4 -32-08, 
performed by the particular welding machine and designated  crew who completed the 
weld that failed. The welding machine and designated crew  shall b e prohibited from 
performing further welds until they have undertaken and passed a second site audit.  If 
any additional work undertaken by designated crew is persistently at fault, they shall be 
prohibited from undertaking further welds until re -training shall be carried out.  
 
All butt fusion joints shall be de -beaded and the bead referenced and kept for 
inspect ion.  Beads shall be examined upon removal for signs of defects or splitting 
along the length of the bead joint. For butt fusion welding, completed welds shall be de -
beaded and the weld bead shall be inspected on site by the welding crew. Beads shall 
be la belled, bagged and stored by the Developer’s contractor and access shall be 
provided to the Irish Water field engineer to inspect the weld beads when requested.  
 
The provision of the sample and all costs associated with their provision including 
restoring the pipe to service and reinstatement will be borne by the Developer . Untested 
sample welds shall be properly catalogued and stored by the Developer  until the end of 
the Defect Liability Period.   The sample welds thus stored shall remain the property of 
Irish Water and shall be made available to the Irish Water’s field inspectors at any time 
for testing should it be so directed.  
 
Pipe coils will only be permitted to be used for pipe diameters of 125mm OD and below.  
Pipe ovality  on coiled pipes can have a detrimental effect on the integrity of 
electrofusion joints on both socket and saddle type fittings. Hydraulic re -rounding 
clamps and steel re -rounding inserts must be used to permit a straight length of pipe to 
be electrofusion  jointed to the ends of the coil. The pipe profile within the area of the coil 
to be jointed shall be re -rounded to within the limits of ovality prescribed by BS EN 
1201 -3. 
 
A coil of PE pipe length with a diameter greater than  100mm OD shall require the u se 
three  electrofusion couplers to joint any additional PE coil length to it. Two lengths of 
straight stick PE pipe (min length 500mm) shall be used to join the coils together. A 
coupler shall join the straight sticks to the ends of each coil, a third coup ler shall then be 
used to electro fuse the straight sticks sections together.  
 
Coils of PE pipe lengths with diameter less than 100mm OD shall be joined by using 
two electrofusion couplers to joint one length of straight stick PE pipe (min length of 
500mm)  between them.  
 
All pipe joints, fittings and accessories shall be free from lead.  
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
67 
 3.17 Rising Main  Fittings  
 
3.17.1 General  
 
All fittings to Wastewater  Rising Main s, including sluice valves, scour valves, air valves 
and meters shall be operable without the need to enter Chambers or other confined 
spaces. The fittings shall be suitable for use with untreated Wastewater  flows.  
 
3.17.2 Sluice Valves    
 
Sluice valves shall be double flanged ductile iron resilient seated  valves, suitable for use 
in Wastewater  pipework and Rising Main s. They shall comply with the requirements of 
BS 5163  - Parts 1 and 2, I S EN 1074, Part s 1 and 2, and they shall have the CE 
marking in accordance with the EU Construction Products Regulations (No. 305/2011 –
CPR) . Sluice valves shall be suitable to be buried in the ground and shall have a 
minimum design life of 50 years. All flanges shall be drilled to PN 16 and shall have 
ducti le iron flanges in accordance with IS EN 1092 Parts 1 and 2 . Sluice valves shall be 
capable of accommodating a maximum differential pressure during operation of 16bar.  
Telescopic s pindle s shall be fitted with a cast iron false cap (complete with grub screw ). 
Valves in pumping station valve chambers shall be fixed to flanged pipework and shall 
be wheel operated.  
 
The fittings associated with the sluice valve will be dependent on the pipe material of 
the Rising Main . In ductile iron mains, the valve shall be  fitted with an appropriate 
dismantling joint and a flanged to plain ended pipe with a flexible coupling at one end, a 
flanged to plain ended pipe and a flexible coupling at the other end to allow the valve’s 
disconnection from the Rising Main  pipework for  maintenance if  desired. Puddle flanges 
shall be fixed to the flanged to plain ended pipe, as appropriate, to allow it to be secured 
to a thrust block. One of the proprietary flexible couplers may not be required on 
spigot/socket ductile iron pipes. In polyethylene pipes the valve shall be fitted to an 
appropriate dismantling joint and a stub flange with backing ring at one end and a stub 
flange with back ing ring at the other end to allow the valve’s disconnection from the 
Rising Main  pipework for maintenance if desired. The stub flanges shall be fusion 
welded to the polyethylene main at both sides of the valve arrangement. Alternative 
pipe fitting pieces will be required for other pipe material types.  
 
The depth of the slu ice valve stem cap, or the top of an extension spindle, shall not be 
less 2 50mm below the finished ground level and no valve stem cap or spindle cap s hall 
be greater than 350mm below gro und level , while observing the requirements for depth 
of cover of the pipe as outlined in Section 3.9  above.  
 
All sluice valves shall be CLOCKWISE CLOSING. The direction of closing shall be 
imprinted on the valve casing  and on the associated marker plate . The number of turns 
(n) to open/close the valve shall be: n = 2N+1 where N is diameter in inches. The 
operating torque must not exceed the max allowed in BS 5163 -1, Type B. Valves in IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
68 
 deep chambers shall be provided with extended spindles , completed with associated 
tube, adequately fixed/braced within the chamber.  
 
The sluice valve shall be protected from corrosion by a coating in accordance with  
 
A) WIS 4 -52-01. or  
B) IS EN 14901  
 
For coatings in accordance with WIS 4 -52-01, the internal water -wetted surface shall be 
coated to Class A standard while all other surfaces shall be coated to Class B standard.  
 
3.17.3 Scour Valve Arrangements  
 
Scour valves shall be double flanged ductile iron resilient seated valves as outlined in 
Section 3.1 7.2 above. Sluice valves shall be provided on the Rising Main  at either side 
of the take -off point of the s cour pipe, complete with dismantling joint arrangement  as 
outlined above . The scour pipe and scour valve shall have the following minimum 
diameters:  
 
Diameter of Rising Main  (mm)    Diameter of Scour (mm)  
 
         80        80 
100 to 200        100 
200 to 300                100 to 200 
 
Scour valves and outlet pipes shall be sized for gradual emptying time and based on the 
capacity of the scour chamber and the vacuum tanker used for emptying the chamber. 
Each specific location will require the approval of Irish Water and the relevant Loca l 
Authority.   
 
The scour valve should be located off of the line of the Rising Main  in a separate scour 
chamber. The scour take -off from the Rising Main  shall be provided by a flanged tee 
piece fitting with a level invert outlet of appropriate size. The connection pipe between 
tee piece at the take -off point on the Rising Main  and the scour chamber shall be of 
ductile iron material. A scour chamber , as de scribed below  in Section 3.18.2 , shall be 
provided downstream of the take -off point and the discharge point to balance the scour 
discharge and to allow collection and pumping out of scour discharge and debris.  
 
Pipe fittings for the tee piece at the take -off point will be dependent on the pipe material 
of the Rising Main . In ductile iron mains, the tee piece shall be fitted with a flange to 
plain ended pipe , dismantling joints  and flexible coupling at both ends. One of the 
proprietary flexible couplers may  not be required on spigot/socket ductile iron pipes. In 
polyethylene pipes the tee piece shall be fitted to a stub flange with backing ring at both 
ends. The stub flanges shall be fusion welded to the polyethylene main at both sides of 
the tee piece arran gement. Alternative pipe fitting pieces will be required for other pipe 
material types.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
69 
  
3.17.4 Wastewater Air Valves  
 
Air valves shall be of Wastewater  air valve type with isolating valve in accordance with 
the requirements of BS ISO 7121. The Air valves shall have bodies and covers of cast 
iron to BS EN 1561 with flanges drilled to PN 16 in accordance with IS EN 1092. Each 
valve shall have a large and a small air escape orifice with an isolating valve. The 
isolating valve shall be either a resilient seated gate valve to BS 5163  and BS EN 1074, 
Part 2 and shall be of a boltless bonnet design , or a butterfly va lve to IS EN 1074 Part 2 . 
The inlet d iameter shall be 80mm for Rising Main s of 250mm and below.  
  
The location of the air valve shall be the subject of particular agreement with Irish Water 
to ensure that the risk of odour is eliminated. The valve shall be generally located at the 
high points of a Rising Main . The air valve shall have a flanged inlet and it shall be fitted 
on a flanged tee -piece branch off of the Rising Main . The tee piece shall be supported 
on a concrete cr adle supported on the floor of the valve chamber.  
 
The flanged tee piece shall be fitted at one end with a flange to plain ended connection 
piece of ductile iron  material . This fitting shall be built into the wall of the air valve 
chamber and fitted with a puddle flange. It shall extend outside the wall by 400mm  to 
allow its connection to the Rising Main  pipework. The other flanged end of the tee piece 
shall be fitted to a dismantling joint, which in turn shall be attached to a flanged to plain 
ended pipe.  This flanged to plain ended fitting shall be built into the wall of the air valve 
chamber and fitted with a puddle flange. It shall extend outside the wall by 400mm to 
allow its connection to the Rising Main  pipework. The omission of the dismantling joint  
and flanged to plain ended pipe and its replacement with a  longer  flanged to plain 
ended pipe, complete with puddle flange, will be allowed if written confirmation from the 
air valve manufacturer is provided to warrant that the air valve and isolation val ve 
assembly can be replaced without the need to take the rising main out of operation.  
 
Rocker pipe  arrangement s shall be provided at either side of the air valve chamber in 
the case of ductile iron Rising Main s. The rising main pipe shall terminate outside the 
wall at either side of the chamber with a stub/rocker pipe arrangement, a straight length 
of pipe and a flexible coupling. The straight length of rocker pipe shall be connected by 
a flexible coupling to a length of plain/flanged ductile iron pi pe, which shall be built into 
the wall of the chamber, complete with a puddle flange.  In the case of polyethylene 
Rising Main s, the built in pipe fitting in the walls of the chamber shall be double flanged 
ductile iron. Stub flange with backing ring shall be fitted at either end of the Rising Main  
pipework.  
 
3.17.5 Other Fitting Materials  
 
Joint gaskets for flexible and flanged joints shall be Ethylene Propylene Diene Mon omer 
(EPDM). Gasket material shall comply with the requirements of EN 681 -1, Type WA 
with a hardness range of 76 – 84. Gaskets shall be tested in accordance with BS 7874. 
Gaskets for flanged joints shall be full face type. Gaskets shall be designed to meet a IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
70 
 working and test pressure of 16  bar and 24 bar respectively, when installed as intended 
in flanged and flexible joints.  
 
All lubricants to be used in joints shall be provided by and recommended by the pipe 
and fitting manufacturer and shall have no dele terious effects on either the joint rings or 
pipes and shall be unaffected by the liquid to be conveyed.  
 
Nuts and bolts used in flanges joints shall be provided by the pipes and fittings 
manufacturer and shall be made of steel in accordance with IS EN IS I 898. Metal 
washers shall comply with BS 4320. All nuts, bolts and washers shall be protected 
against corrosion in accordance with WIS 4-52-03 for a barrier and galvanic coating 
system. Flange assemblies, including nuts, bolts, washers and gaskets shall b e 
designed to a working and test pressure of 16 bar and 24 bar respectively, when 
installed.  
 
Manufacturers shall supply tape wrapping to be used for wrapping joints where 
required. The wrapping required shall be a high performance polyethylene wrap with a 
minimum thickness of 6mm.  
 
Flange adopters shall comply with IS EN 14525 and shall have an allowable operating 
pressure of 16 bar. Flanges shall be PN16 rated and shall be drilled in accordance with 
IS EN 1092. The body of the end ring shall be ductile iron in accordance with IS EN 
1563. Flange adaptors shall be suitable for use with ductile iron, cast iron, steel, PVC, 
asbestos cement and polyethylene. Flange adaptors for polyethylene pipes shall be 
designed for Type 1 end restraint to IS EN 1284 2 and I S EN 14525 . The manufacturer 
shall supply any liners required to stiffen polyethylene or other pipe  material types  in 
accordance with his /her recommendations.  
 
Couplings shall comply with IS EN 14525. Couplings shall have an allowable operating 
pressure of  16 Bar. The body and end ring shall be either, stainless steel minimum 
Grade 304 or ductile iron in accordance with IS EN 1563. Couplings shall be suitable for 
use with ductile iron, cast iron, steel, PVC, asbestos cement, polyethylene. Flange 
adaptors fo r polyethylene pipes shall be designed for Type 1 end restraint to IS EN 
1284 2 and IS EN 14525 . The manufacturer shall supply any liners required to stiffen 
polyethylene or other pipe  types in accordance with his recommendations.  
 
Dismantling joints shall be designed for a working pressure of 16 bar and be tested to 
comply with the performance requirements of WIS 4 -21-02. The body shall be either, 
ductile iron in accordance with IS EN 1563 with a minimum tensile strength of 420 
N/mm2 or steel in accordance with BS EN 10025 with minimum grade S275. 
Dismantling joint flanges shall be minimum PN16 rated and flanges shall be drilled in 
accordance with IS EN 1092. All bolts shall be a minimum, either steel Property Class 
4.6 in accordance with BS EN ISO 898 -1 or stainless steel, with a minimum chromium 
content of 13%, in accordance with BS EN ISO 3506 -1. All nuts shall be minimum, 
either steel Property Class 4 in accordance with BS EN ISO 898 -2 or stainless steel, 
with a minimum chromium content of 13%, in accorda nce with BS EN ISO 3506 -2. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
71 
 Couplings shall be suitable for use with ductile iron, cast iron, steel or PVC pipe 
material:  
 
3.18 Sluice Valve , Scour Valve and Air Valve  Chambers   
 
3.18.1 Sluice Valve Chamber   
 
Sluice v alve chamber for Rising Main s shall have a minimum plan area of 600mm by 
600mm for pipes up to 350mm in diameter. Alternative dimensions for sluice valve 
chambers of 450mm by 600mm or 450mm by 450mm may be allowed subject to Irish 
Water review. Valve chambers for pipe diameters in excess of 350mm shall be varied to 
suit the size of the appliance being housed. Chambers can be constructed of pre -cast 
concrete or of high density blockwork. Alternatively, proprietary prefabricated chamber 
units may a lso be used, but only subject to the approval of Irish Water.    
 
The walls of blockwork chambers shall be constructed with 215mm , 20N/mm² high 
density solid concrete block work, complying with the requirements of IS EN 771 – Part 
3, laid on flat, bedded in M20 mortar , complying with the requirements of IS EN 998 – 
Part 2,  and flush pointed, without internal plaster .. The walls of the chamber can 
alternatively be formed with reinforced pre -cast concrete units formed with C28/35 
concret e, 20mm aggregate size, with mild steel reinforcement. The units shall be 
square, composite units, with a minimum wall thickness of 100mm, thickened at each 
corner. Single height precast units will be acceptable. If modular units are proposed, the 
pre-cast concrete units shall be bedded in M30 mortar , complying with the requirements 
of IS EN 998 – Part 2,  and flush pointed.  
 
The valve chamber floors shall be formed with C25/30 concrete , in accordance with IS 
EN 206 , 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620, with a minimum 
thickness of 100mm  complete with mild steel reinforcement. Alternatively, pre -cast 
reinforced concrete  bearing slabs of similar depth and concrete strength may also be 
used . The floor slab shall be founded on the granular pipe surround material or on 
Clause 804 backfill material above the granular surround. The floor slab of valve 
chambers shall not be cast against the body of the sluice valve. A Drain  hole shall be 
allowed in the base slab to allow free drainage of liquid from the chamber to free 
draining granular material below.   
 
The chamber shall be complete with a reinforced concrete roof formed with C30/37 
concrete, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS 
EN 12620, of min imum thickness of 150mm, reinforced with high tensile reinforcement 
to BS 4449.  
 
The sluice valve chambers shall be surrounded with Clause 804 granular backfill 
material, in acco rdance with the Transport Infrastructure Ireland (formerly National 
Roads Authority) Specification for Road Works, compacted in 150mm layers, to the 
underside of the road/footpath structure.   
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
72 
 Sluice valve chambers shall be covered with approved heavy duty cast iron surface box 
covers  and frames , 445mm by 280mm plan area, to IS 261 or BS 5834, subject to the 
minimum mass of the cover per m2 for Grade A being 250kg/m2 and Grade B being 
200kg/m2. The covers and frames shall be suitable for road and traffic conditions. Third  
Party Certification shall be provided for all cast iron surface box covers and frames.   
 
The sluice valve cover frames shall be supported on Class B engineering brick to IS EN 
771 – Part 2 , minimum of one course with a maximum of three courses . The brickwork 
shall be bedded in mortar, minimum M30 strength to IS EN  998-Part 2:2010.  The frame 
and cover shall be set in rapid hardening cementitious, epoxy resin or polyester resin 
mortar. The mortar shall have a minimum working time of 15 minutes and  shall reach a 
minimum compressive stre ngth of 30 N/mm2 and min imum tensile strength of 5 N/mm2 
within 3 hours of mixing. The covers shall be set on the brick to finish in alignment with 
the final road or footway surface. The finish of the road surface aro und the Chamber 
cover and frame shall be to the requirements of the relevant Roads Authority for the 
area.  
 
The metal covers shall have appropriate identification marks on the cover. Covers for 
surface boxes on Rising Main s shall have either the word “ WASTEWATER ” or the 
letter s “WW” cast on the top surface in 75mm letters. Covers shall have “SV” (sluice 
valve) imprinted on them . Covers shall be level with the finished ground level after 
permanent restoration.  
 
The valve covers, where located in grass ar eas, shall be surrounded by a concrete 
plinth, 200mm all round and 100mm deep formed with C20/25 concrete , in accordance 
with IS EN 206 , 20mm aggregate size , in accordance with IS EN 12620,  bedded in 
Clause 804 material. The plinth shall be complete with b ull-nose finish to its perimeter 
and shall be provided with a mild steel reinforcement link.  
 
Proprietary prefabricated spindle tube units  with surface box may be used only in 
special situations. Their use shall be subject to specific Irish Water requirements and 
written approval.  
 
Concrete in all chambers, etc., shall comply wit h the requirements of IS EN 206 , and 
granular material in the concrete shall comply with the requirements of IS EN 12620 
(See also SR 16). (This provision shall apply to al l situations within this Code of Practice 
Document where in -situ and structural concrete is required.)  
 
3.18.2 Scour Chamber  
 
The scour chamber shall be constructed off  the line of the rising main with suitable 
access for a vacuum tanker. Scour chambers shall be provided to balance the scour 
discharge from the Rising Main  and to collect the contents of the Rising Main  during the 
scouring operation for separate disposal. Where possible, scour chambers should be 
located off carriageways and g enerally in areas only subject to foot traffic.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
73 
 The scour chamber shall be constructed with precast concrete Manhole  wall units 
completed with rubber sealing ring gasket between units, complying with the 
requirements of IS EN 1917 and IS 420 , complete wi th a 150mm minimum thickness of 
cast in situ concrete formed surround, C20 /25, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm 
aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620, with either pre -cast or cast in -situ 
concrete base of C30/37 concrete, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate, in 
accordance with IS EN 12620, (300mm minimum thick) with a 400mm x 400mm x 
200mm deep floor sump located beneath the roof opening.  
 
The scour chamber shall have cast in -situ concrete roof  slab (225mm minimum 
thickness), constructed of C30/37, 20mm aggregate size, reinforced with high tensile 
steel bar reinforcement, with a minimum 40mm concrete cover. Alternatively, precast 
concrete roof slabs (160mm minimum thickness) may be used subject to Irish Water 
approval and compliance with IS EN 1917 and IS 420 . This approach would be the 
preferable option where pre -cast concrete ring units are used as scour chamber walls. 
An access opening shall be formed in the Manhole  roof slabs. The minimum dim ensions 
of the roof opening shall be 6 00mm by 6 00mm. Circular Manhole  openings of 6 00mm 
diameter may be used if the scour chamber cover is circular.  
 
The scour chamber shall have a minimum internal clear dimension of 1, 350mm. 
Confined space access require ments will apply with planned safe access procedures.  
 
The roof slab opening shall be provided with a cover and frame to comply with IS EN 
124, Class D400 , and BS 7903 . Frames should be square with a square or circular 
insert with a minimum clear diameter/dimension of 6 00mm and a minimum depth of 
100mm, if located in light traffic roads. Class D400 and Class E600 covers on heavily 
trafficked roads will require a 150mm deep frame.  All cov ers shall be of non -rock 
design.  Two closed keyways shall be p rovided in each cover. Where square covers are 
provided, they shall be double leafed covers  and secured to prevent the cover section 
from falling into the chamber . Circular covers shall be single leafed. The covers shall be 
set in position flush with the f inished ground surface, whether, road, pavement or open 
ground. Covers shall be level with the finished ground level after permanent restoration. 
The frame cover should be supported on solid engineering brick , 215mm wide, to IS EN 
771 – Part 2 , one course minimum and no more than a maximum of three courses in 
height, bedded and pointed in  mortar , minimum M30 strength to IS EN  998-Part 2:2010. 
Alternatively, pre -cast reinforced concrete seating rings of similar depth to brick courses 
and of similar concrete strength may be used instead of brick where pre -cast rings are 
being used. The frame and cover shall be set in rapid hardening cementitious, epoxy 
resin or polyester resin mortar. The mortar shall have a minimum working time of 15 
minutes and shall reach a  minimum compressive strength of 30 N/mm2 and min imum 
tensile strength of 5 N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing. Standard concrete blocks or bricks 
shall not be permitted. The cover frame should be installed and bedded to the 
manufacturer’s instructions.  The fi nish of the road surface around the Chamber cover 
and frame shall be to the requirements of the relevant Roads Authority for the area.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
74 
 The metal covers shall have appropriate identification marks on the cover. Covers for 
surface boxes on Rising Main s shall have either the word “ WASTEWATER ” or the 
letters “WW” cast on the top surface in 75mm letters. The cover shall also have “ScV” 
(scour valve) imprinted on it.  
 
The scour chamber shall be provided with ductile iron inlet pipework, built into the walls  
of the chamber and fully sealed, complete with puddle flanges. The inlet pipe shall be 
fitted with a Wastewater  sluice valve , complete with extended spindle to allow its 
opening from ground level . A surface box to IS 261 or BS 5834 , subject to the minimum  
mass of the cover per m2 for Grade A being 250kg/m2 and Grade B being 200kg/m2, 
shall be provided to over a roof opening to al low access to the extended spindle for the 
chamber sluice valve.   
 
Scour valves, scour chambers and outlet pipes for large diameter mains shall be sized 
for an emptying time appropriate for a vacuum tanker identified by Irish Water. Each 
specific location for the scour valve chamber will require the approval of Irish Wate r and 
the relevant Local Authority.  
 
The chamber shall be fitted with Manhole  steps to comply with IS EN 13101, Type D, 
Class 1, galvanised mild steel and plastic encapsulated. Access to the co nfined space 
within the chamber shall not generally be required  but when needed this access shall be 
by way of a safe access p lan.  
 
3.18.3 Air Valve Chamber   
 
Air valves shall be installed in chambers and these shall be suitably sized to 
accommodate the air valve and allow access for maintenance /replacement . The 
chamber should be located to allow ease of access and maintenance of the air valve. 
The base and walls of the chamber shall be constructed in C30/37 concrete, in 
accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620, 
with a m inimum thickness of 300mm  and 250mm respectively . The chamber shall be 
complete with a reinforced concrete roof of minimum thickness of 225mm, formed with 
C30/37 concrete, in accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size , in accordance 
with IS EN 12620, reinforced with high tensile reinforcement to BS 4449.  
 
The roof slab shall incorporate a 900mm x 900mm opening to allow the visual 
inspection of the air valve and to allow access to the associated isolating valve. Cast -in 
recessed lifting lugs shall be p rovided in each corner of the concrete roof slab to allow 
its positioning in place. In addition, these lifting lugs shall be used to remove the roof 
slab for access to the chamber to allow maintenance of the air valve and its removal 
and replacement if nec essary. Access to the air valve chamber will be by way of an 
approved safety plan during the operational life of the unit.  
 
The internal dimensions of the chamber shall be sufficient to contain the air valve and 
any associated pipework. The bolts and join ts shall be visible and accessible in order to 
allow for maintenance and for the possible future replacement of the air valve without IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
75 
 the need for excavation. The depth of the meter chamber shall provide a minimum of 
300mm clearance beneath the air valve f itting. Sufficient clearance shall be provided 
between the walls and the air valve equipment to allow maintenance activities to be 
carried out.  
 
The air valve chambers roof slab opening shall be provided with approved ventilated 
heavy duty metal surface c overs to IS EN 124 & BS 7903, rating D400, if located on 
roadways or footways. Lower load capacity rated covers may be used if the chamber is 
located off road in green areas .  
 
The cover frames shall be supported on Class B engineering brick , 215mm wide, to IS 
EN 771  – Part 2 . The brickwork shall be bedded in mortar, minimum M30 strength to IS 
EN 998-Part 2:2010. Alternatively, pre -cast reinforced concrete seating rings of similar 
depth to brick courses and of similar concrete strength may also be used instead of 
brick where pre -cast concrete units are used. The frame and cover shall be set in rapid 
hardening cemen titious, epoxy resin or polyester resin mortar. The mortar shall have a 
minimum working time of 15 minutes and shall reach a minimum compressive strength 
of 30 N/mm2 and minimum tensile strength of 5 N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing. The 
covers shall be set on the brick to finish in alignment with the road or footway surface. 
The finish of the road surface around the Chamber cover and frame shall be to the 
requirements of the relevant Roads Authority for the area. Air valve chamber covers, 
where located in gr ass areas, shall be surrounded by a concrete plinth, 200mm all 
round and 100mm deep formed with C20/25 concrete, in accordance with IS EN 206, 
20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620, bedded in Clause 804 material. 
The plinth shall incorporate mild steel reinforcement links and shall have a bull -nose 
finish around its external perimeter.  
 
The metal covers shall have appropriate identification marks on the cover. The c overs 
for surface boxes on Rising Main s shall have either the word “ WASTEWATER ” or the 
letters “WW” cast on the top surface in 75mm letters. The cover shall also have “AV” (air 
valve) imprinted on it. Covers shall be level with the finished ground level after 
permanent restoration.  
 
Access to the air valve chamber confined space shall be subject to a safety access 
plan. Access to the air valve chamber for maintenance of the air valve shall be achieved 
by removal of the roof slab unit.  
 
3.19 Existing Utilities            
 
It is the responsibility of the Developer  and/or designer to obtain all current information 
on the location of other existing utility providers’ apparatus prior to the design being 
carried out. During installation, due diligence should be used when making excavations 
for Sewer s and services and care shall be taken to prote ct and support all existing 
services (water, gas, telecommunications, drainage, electricity, etc.) and other works so 
as not to interfere with the working arrangements and integrity of such utilities.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
76 
 3.20 Working near Existing  Pipes (Notifications and Separation Distances)  
 
Detailed proposals, including work method statements, insurance confirmation and 
details of work completed of a similar nature must be submitted to Irish Water for its 
consideration before approval will be issue d prior to undertaking work in close proximity 
to Irish Water assets. All such works in the vicinity of Water Main s or Sewers of 400mm 
diameter and greater shall be subject to written agreement with Irish Water before 
construction commences on site . This agreement shall also includ e any necessary 
protection for Water Main s and Sewers. The placing of concrete over or around Water 
Main s is expressly forbidden.  
 
In the case of installations in close proximity to existing Water Main s and Sewers , the 
following minimum horizontal distances shall be maintained between pipes/ducts, 
cabinets, poles, Manhole s, junction boxes, chambers, etc.  where depth to the existing 
infrastructure does not exceed 1.5m : 
 
3.20.1  600mm at either side of pressure mains up to and including 150mm 
diameter . 
3.20.2  1m at either side of pressure mains of 2 00mm to 250mm diameter . 
3.20.3  2m at either side of pressure mains of 300mm and 375mm diameter . 
3.20.4  5m at either side of   pressure mains of 400mm and 450mm diameter . 
3.20.5  Specific Irish Wate r advised distances for pressure mains in excess of 
475mm . 
3.20.6  600mm at either side of gravity sewer up to and including 225mm 
diameter.  
3.20.7  1m at either side of gravity sewer of 300mm and up to 450 mm diameter.  
3.20.8  1.5m at either side of gravity sewers of 600mm diame ter and greater .  
 
Specific written permission shall be required from Irish Water for installing infrastructure 
closer to existing Irish Water asset than the limits outlined above  or where the depth of 
the existing service exceeds 1.5m . For strategic fibre  optic or oil filled cables, the 
separation distance requirements of the service provider shall apply. Irish Water may 
require increased clearance separation distances in excess of the specific utility 
providers requirements.  
 
The separation distances between new pipework associated with the Works and 
between the pipework associated with the Works and other utility pipework are set out 
in Section 3.5.18  and Section 3.5.19  above.  
 
Where pipes or ducts are t o be laid close to an existing Water Main  or Sewer  in the 
ownership of Irish Water, notification in writing shall be provided a minimum of  15 
working days ahead of the commencement  of the work. This requirement shall also 
apply to the carrying out of trial  holes or slit trenches to locate the main or to gather 
ground investigation data. In the case of large diameter (350mm or g reater) distribution 
and trunk Water Main s and Sewers , Irish Water must be notified at leas t one month 
before the work is commenced . This notification is in addition to any formal procedures IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
77 
 detailed elsewhere in this document. The notifications shall apply where work is 
proposed within the following proximities of Irish Water infrastructure:  
 
3.20.9  1m at either side of existing pipes less than 200mm diameter .  
3.20.10  2m at either side of existing pipes of 200mm to 350mm diameter . and   
3.20.11  5m at either side of existing pipes of 350mm or greater.  
 
Developer’ s shall also comply with any notification requirements associated with other 
utility provider s’ infrastructure (ESB Network s, Gas Network s Ireland, 
telecommunications providers, etc.) that these Utility Companies might have.  
 
Any costs arising from the Developer  work associated with locating  pipework or any 
costs due to work undertaken by Irish Water or its agents to assist the Developer  in 
identifying and locating the infrastructure shall be fully covered by the Developer . The 
Developer  will be notified of these costs in advance.  
 
Irish Water reserves the right to revert to the Developer  with s pecific requirements in  
relation to protection of its Water Main s and/or Sewer . Care shall be taken while laying 
pipes so as not to damage any Water Main  or Sewer or any accessories . Any damage 
shall be notified immediately to Irish Water on the Irish Water website, www.water.ie . 
The per son who causes the damage to a Water Main  or Sewer or any accessories  will 
be deemed to have committed an offence under Section 45 of the Water Services  Act 
2007.  
 
3.21 Envi ronmental Considerations          
 
The design should take into account the impact of the Works on the environment and 
the impact of the environment on the  Works . Cognisance should be taken of amenity 
conservation, preservation of access to the public and facilitation of recreation when 
designing infrastructure. Consideration should also be taken of areas of specific 
ecological interest such as Special Area of Con servation ( SACs ), National Heritage 
Area ( NHAs ), etc.  
 
The design of landscaping works shall be undertaken concurrently and in conjunction 
with the design of the Works. The collaborative design process shall incorporate and 
take account of any likely asses sed negative impact(s) on the root zones and root 
protection areas of trees and/or large shrubs on the Works. The design process shall 
seek to minimise risk to roots and the risk of root ingress to the Works by appropriate 
separation distances or by the pr ovision of root protection barriers.  
 
The design , procurement and supervision  of the landscaping works next to and over the 
Works shall be undertaken by the Developer  using a fully qualified and competent 
landscape architect, working in collaboration with  a fully qualified and competent 
arboriculturist , both  in consultation with Irish Water. Any part of Works which does not 
have special tree root protection measures shall be positioned with adequate separation 
from new trees/shrubs to ensure that their roo t systems will not cause damage to the IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
78 
 infrastructure. These separation distances will vary from ( tree and shrub ) species to 
species and specialist advice shall be obtained by the Developer  from his/her landscape 
architect and arboriculture  advisers in thi s regard, as outlined above , and provided in 
the Design Submission .  
 
Special tree root protection measures may be provided to reduce the separation 
distances between the Works and the new planting. The design of the tree planting and 
species selection wil l need to be decided in relation to the depth of the pipe and the 
distance from the Works. Where tree planting is proposed within the distances where 
tree roots could directly damage the Works, as referenced in Table A1 of BS 5837, 
special protection measu res shall be provided. These measures might be achieved in 
the pipe system by the provision of high performance joints or the use of polyethylene 
pipes with welded joints. Alternatively, proprietary protection systems, such as vertical 
barriers, geotextile  pipe wrap, tree planting pits, etc. may be used to prevent the tree 
roots systems from reaching the Works.  
 
Tree planting will not normally be allowed directly over the Works or within the distances 
referred to in Table A1 of BS 5837, but  this may be increased depending on the species 
type or relaxed where it can be shown that appropriate species selection and protection 
measures can be provided to prevent root ingress damage to the satisfaction of Irish 
Water. Such  protection measures may include root  barriers, root directors and by 
avoiding planting next to joints, valves or other sensitive parts of the pipe system.  
 
Where such planting is carried out directly over the Works and where excavation is 
required to subsequently access the infrastructure, there may be a requirement to 
remove the trees/shrubs , but this will be assessed on a case by case basis and any 
possible mitigation measures to reduce impact on tree vegetation should be 
investigated before a final decision to remove the tree vegetation i s taken. Only shallow 
rooting shrubs shall be planted close to or over the Works.  
 
Where new pipe installation works are to be carried out near existing tree vegetation, 
these shall be in accordance with the provisions of BS 5837 (Trees in Relation to 
Design, Demolition and Construction – Recommendations) and the National Joint 
Utilities  Group (NJUG), Guidelines for Planting, Installation and Maintenance of Utility 
Apparatus in Proximity to Trees, Volume 4, which outline the following zones:  
 
Prohibited Zone  (1m from tree trunk): Excavation of any kind shall not be 
undertaken within this  zone unless , after full consultation with an arboriculturist or 
landscape consultant , it is deemed acceptable . No material, plant and spoil shall be 
stored within this area.  
 
Precaution Zone (defined as a radius of four times the circumference of the tree  at 
1.5m above ground level): Where excavation is carried out within this zone, the use 
of mechanical excavation plant shall be prohibited. All such excavation works shall 
be carried out manually or with the aid of an air -spade or vacuum and precautions 
shall be undertaken to protect any exposed roots from damage. All such excavation IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
79 
 works shall be supervised by a qualified arborist. No material, plant and spoil shall 
be stored within this area.  
 
Permitted Zone  (outside the Precaution Zone): Excavation works may be 
undertaken within this zone, but caution must be applied and the use of mechanical 
plant limited. Any exposed roots should be protected.   
:  
The installation of any new pipework or the planting of ne w tree vegetation within the 
vicinity of existing pipe systems will need to take a ccount of the provisions of BS 5837 
and BS 8545 . Irish Water does not favour planting over its Networks.  
 
3.22 Food Service Establishments  
 
A Grease Recovery Unit (GRU) must be fitted on the outlet from all kitchen sinks within 
Food Service Establishments (FSE) and commercial buildings with food preparation or 
canteen facilities subject to the requirements of Irish Water. Cognisance shall be t aken 
of the guidance provided in the Water Services Training Group Guidance Document for 
Control of Fat, Oil and Grease or any updated guidance as may be issued by Irish 
Water. Grease traps and/or GRUs must also be fitted on any commercial scale food 
prepa ration locations  to achieve the discharge limits set out in the Trade Effluent 
Licence . The u se of degreasing agents and enzymes for the breakdown of grease is not 
permitted , except  with the agreement of Irish Water .  
 
3.23  Grease Traps            
 
Trade Effluent from commercial food preparation areas is subject to Trade Effluent 
Licensing , in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government ( Water Pollution ) 
Act (1977 – 1990) . Such discharges shall discharge  to a suitably sized and 
manufacture d grease trap, designed in accordance with IS EN 1825, prior to discharge 
of the Wastewater  to the Works . Full details of the grease trap, including details of the 
proposed maintenance regime, shall be submitted to and agreed with Irish Water ’s 
Wastewater  Source Control and Licencing (WWSCL) unit . These details shall include 
design loading of the grease trap, grease trap capacity, etc. Compliance with guidance 
as set out in the Water Services  Training Group Fat,  Oil and Grease (FOG) Guidance 
Document and I rish Water ’s policy is required in respect of FOG control.  
 
3.24 Macerators            
 
No under -sink or other type of food macerator/grinder for the processing, discharging or 
disposal of food waste to the drainage system shall be installed in developments.  
 
3.25 Basements  
 
Special provision shall be provided by the Developer  where Works  are required to 
collect Wastewater  from basement areas. All Wastewater  from basements shall be 
pumped to ground level to discharge by gravity to the Irish Water Network . The pumped IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
80 
 Wastewater  shall discharge initially to a standoff (Rising Main  discharge  (header )) 
Manhole  before discharging to a Gravity Sewer  connection to a Manhole  on the public 
Sewer  (See Section 3. 7.14 and Section 3.15 ). Direct pumping to the Network  shall not 
be permitted.  
 
Storm Water  from basement car parks shall not be discharged to the Network . Such 
discharge shall be directed to the existing Storm Water  Sewer  in accordance with the 
requirements of the Local Authorit y for the area. Specific requirements may be required 
by the Local Authority for the prevention of Storm Water  flows from basements via 
access points, provision of petrol/oil interceptors  on Storm Drain s, etc.  
 
3.26 Marker  Tape  
 
All sewers and rising main pipework shall have non-degradable marker tape, red or 
orange in colour, installed 300mm above the crown of the pipework or above the 
granular surround material and directly above the centreline of the Pipe. The marker 
tape shall  be laid around Manhole s in the case of sewers to ensure continuity. It shall be 
tied to rising main fittings ( valves ) at a depth of 350mm  and terminated at the pumping 
station . The tape shall be 400mm wide brown polyethylene material, in accordance with 
IS EN 12613 – Plastic Warning Devices for Underground Cables and Pipelines with 
Visual Characteristics. Plastic pipes and concrete pipes shall have a warning mesh 
incorporating a polypropylene reinforced band of stainless steel tracer wire. The correct 
operation of the tracing wire shall be tested.  
 
Service Connections shall have a 200mm wide tape laid at the same depths as outlined 
above (300mm).  
 
3.27 Indicator Marker Plates and Posts  
 
Indicator plates shall clearly identify scour valve, wastewater air valves, meter and 
sluice valve locations. They shall be located to the approval of both Irish Water and the 
Roads Authority for the area. The plates shall be mounted on marker posts at the back 
of footpaths or on the boundary wall of the public thoroughfar e nearest to the hydrant or 
valve.  
The indicator plates and baseboard plates shall comply with BS 3251 . The plate shall 
show the diameter of the Rising Main in “mm” and the distance from the marker to the 
fitting in “m”. Indicator plates  shall have fixed b lack letters (AV, SV, ScV  and Me 
respectively) on a brown background. The plate shall show the diameter of the Main in 
“mm” and the distance from the marker to the fitting shall be indicated in “m”. Marker 
plates shall be metal and shall be fixed with stainless steel non -retractable screws.  
Marker posts shall be of concrete construction, complying with IS EN 206, to conform to 
IS 162. They shall be set 450mm deep in a 0.06 m3 support base of C25/30 concrete, 
20 mm aggregate size.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
81 
 Plastic marker posts s hall not be provided under any circumstance. Plastic indicator 
plates shall not be provided.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
82 
 Part 4 – Construction Related Issues  
 
4.1 Construction – General Requirements         
 
The Developer  shall be responsible for ensuring that the Works  are properly 
constructe d in accordance with this Code of Practice . The Developer  shall give notice to 
Irish W ater before construction  of the Works  commences and shall meet with the Irish 
Water Field Enginee rs to agree procedures and a programme of inspections for quality 
assurance of the infrastructure installation.  
 
The Developer  shall keep accurate site records of the installations during construction  
to allow for the preparation of accurate record drawin gs of the installed infrastructure . 
The Works  shall be constructed  strictly  in accordance with a design  which has been  
submitted by the Developer  to Irish Water and which has been asses sed and accepted 
by Irish Water.  
 
Sewer s, service connections, Rising Main s, pumping stations and ancillary works shall 
be constructed taking due cognisance of the requirements of this Code of Practice in a 
manner such that:  
 
a) where relevant, materials are:  
i) adequately selected, mixed or prepared. and  
ii) installed, u sed, or fixed to perform adequately the functions for which they 
are intended .  
b) no part of the Works  is dama ged or its function impaired by:   
i) the method of construction. or  
ii) runoff from the construction site entering the Sewer  system.  
c) damage to existing ecosystems and major trees in the Development  site is 
prevented.  
d) soil erosion is minimised.  
e)  infrastructure installation is carried out in a saf e, healthy and efficient manner.  
f) the environment is protected.     
 
All necessary  precautions shall be undertaken to avoid causing damage to or 
interference with flow in existing water supply systems, public Sewer s, etc., and such 
precautions shall ensure that debris, silt and mud , etc. do not enter the existing Sewer  
system or any new  Sewer  system being installed as part of the new Development . 
 
All necessary precautions shall be taken to avoid misconnection of the new Works  or 
service connections to other utilities, to existing Sewer  systems or to water bodies that 
are not proposed as the disposal route for which the connection is approved.  For clarity, 
Wastewater  service connections shall only be connected to Wastewater  collection 
infrastructure. Storm Water  pipework shall not be con nected to Wastewater  collection 
infrastructure.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
83 
 Surface Water  from the construction site should not be allowed to enter the Works .  
 
Construction o perations shall be carried out in such a manner as to avoid damage to or 
deterioration of the integrity of adjacent buildings or other infrastructure. Excavations in 
roads and streets shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant Roads Authority 
and the Road Openi ng Licence requirements. The construction operations shall be 
carried out in accordance with the provisions outlined in the Guidance for Control and 
Management of Traffic at Road Works, as published by the Department of Transport , 
Tourism and Sport . All ne cessary precautions shall be taken to avoid  
  
 causing damage to, or interference with flow in, existing public Sewer s, and shall 
ensure that debris, silt and mud etc. do not enter the Sewer .   
 misconnection of Wastewater  drainage systems  to Storm Water  Drain s or 
Sewer s, or Storm Water  drainage to Wastewater  Drain s or Sewer s. 
 misconnection of Wastewater  collection Network  to watercourses or other water 
bodies.   
 
On completion of construction all internal surfaces of the Works  and access points shall 
be thoroughly cleansed of all deleterious matter to prevent it passing into the Network . 
The Works shall be tested and inspected to ensure that:  
 
 It is fit for all practical purpose, leak -tight based on the test requirements 
outlined in Section 4.10.  
 It has been properly cleaned, scoured, swabbed and disinfected and that 
water quality testing has been carried out and found satisfactory.  
 Pipes have not been damaged, deformed or subject to settlements during 
construction.  
 
Specific on -site surveys shall be carried out to confirm that misconnection of services to 
Wastewater  and to Storm W ater Sewer s has not occurred. This shall be achieved by 
the use of dye -testing of pipework in advance of putting these connections into service. 
These tests shall be carried out in the presence of the Irish Water Field Engineers .   
 
Gravity Sewer s, pressure pipelines, Manhole s and inspection chambers shall be leak 
tight when tested after backfilling  based on test requirements outlined in Section 4.10 .  
 
4.2 Transportation, Storage, Handling and Use of Materials      
 
Precautions shall be taken to prevent damage to pipes and fittings during transportation, 
storage, handling and use of materials.  
 
Suitable pipe supports shall be used on vehicles transporting pipes to prevent damage 
to both internal and external coatings by impact, scratching, abrasion, etc.  
 
Purpose made wide fabric slings or suitably designed machines for lifting pipes shall be 
used d uring offloading and/or laying of pipes (particularly flexible pipes with concrete or IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
84 
 cement -mortar linings) to avoid damage and scratches to coatings as well as damage to 
pipe ends. Damaged pipes shall not be used in the W orks.  
 
All pipes and fittings sh all be stored off the ground in a clean environment to prevent 
any contamination of the material prior to its use. Timber supports shall be used  during 
transportation and stacking on site. Pressure pipes shall be capped at either end until 
they are used in the Works to prevent vermin and debris entering them and 
contaminating the material before their use. All fittings shall be supplied in sealed bags 
and they shall remain in these bags until immediately prior to installation. All pipes and 
fittings (and in particular plastic pipes) should be kept clear of fuel oils, and any material 
which becomes contaminated should be discarded.  
 
Materials and co mponents shall be handled in such a manner as to avoid an y damage 
or contamination and in accordance with the applicable recommendations of the 
manufacturers. Pipes and fittings, including coatings and linings, shall be examined for 
damage prior to install ation in the works. Plastic pipes shall be carefully examined for 
flaws, in particular for signs of impact damage and scoring. No polyethylene pipe shall 
be installed with scores or cuts penetrating more than 10% of the wall section thickness. 
If, after in stallation, scores or cuts penetrating more than 10% of the wall section 
thickness are found, the affected pipe length(s) shall be removed and replaced with an 
undamaged pipe length.  
 
4.3 Location of Other Utilities           
 
All available records shall be used to identify the location of utility ducts, cables, pipes, 
etc. Proprietary cable locators shall be used prior to excavation taking place to locate 
and mark these utilities. Trial hole to locate existing services shall be carried out where 
required . Precautions shall be taken when carrying out trial holes and making 
excavations for pipes and services  to ensure no damage is caused to existing services . 
Care shall also be taken to protect and support all existing services and other works so 
as not to interfere with the working arrangements of the services.  
 
4.4 Trench Widths            
 
The trench width shall be kept as narrow as possible but the width must allow adequate 
room for pipe jointing as well as placing and compaction of pipe bedding, haunch , 
surround material and backfill material . Trench widths at the level of the top of the pipe 
should generally be as narrow as safe working conditions will allow, with a desirable 
minimum width of 300mm plus the external diameter of the pipe barrel, or a mini mum 
trench width of 500mm.  The trench width should not exceed the pipe diameter by more 
than 500mm.  
 
Trench widths for pipe sizes up to 80mm diameter may be less than 500mm subject to 
consideration being given to the trench depth, health and safety consid eration and 
access requirements.   
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
85 
 In ground that contains ashes, chemicals or material that could accelerate corrosion or 
deterioration of the pipe, contact shall be made with the Environmental Protection 
Agency in relation to contaminated soil disposal requirements.  
 
Edges of trenches in bituminous or concrete roads, footpaths and hard surfaces shall be 
cut using a concrete saw or other equivalent mechanical means in advance of breaking 
through the paved surface above the trench position. This shall be carried out in all 
instances to reduce damage to the remaining hard surface and to restrict over -break of 
the trench . 
 
4.5 Trench Base             
 
The trench base shall be free of hard objects such as stones, rock projections, tree 
roots, etc. Where the trench base is through rock or shows recurrence of hard objects, 
the material shall be excavated and allowance should be made for an additional 
thickness of bedding of at least 150mm and the void backfilled with Clause 80 8 granular 
material in accordance w ith the Transport Infrastructure Ireland (formerly National 
Roads Authority) Specification for Road Works. Soft spots in the trench base shall be 
excavated out and replaced with Clause 80 8 material as outlined in Section 4.7  below.  
 
4.6 Cleaning Pipes   
 
Before installation, all pipes for inclusion in the Works  shall be examined internally for 
dirt, stones or any foreign matter and shall be thoroughly cleaned before installation in 
the final position. To prevent foreign matter or vermin from entering the  Works, all open 
ends of laid pipes shall be plugged , if work is suspended,  until the next pipe is ready for 
jointing. If proprietary pipe stops/plugs are supplied, they shall be left in place until just 
before jointing.  
 
4.7 Pipe Bedding, Haunch and Surrounds        
 
Pipe bedding, haunch side fill and surround material for buried pipelines shall comply 
with WIS 4 -08-02 and its associated Guidance Note, IGN 4 -08-01, UK Water Industry 
Specifications , both updated in 2008 . Granular material shall be 14mm to 5mm 
(designation d/D 2/14) graded aggregate or 10mm (designation d/D 4/10)  single sized 
aggregate, complying with the requirements of IS EN 13242  and should have a 
compaction factor value not greater than 0.2 wh en measured in accordance with I S EN 
752. Both the 14mm to 5mm (designation d/D 2/14) graded aggregate and the 10mm 
(designation d/D 4/10)  single sized aggregate may be used for pipe diameters greater 
than 100mm and up to 300mm. The 10mm (designation d/D 4/10)  single sized 
aggregate sh all be used with 100mm pipes  or less. T he 14mm to 5mm (designation d/D 
2/14) graded aggregate shall be used for pipe diameters of 350mm and above.  
 
Pipes shall not be supported on stones or rock at any point  along the pipe trench . Rock 
shall be excavated to a depth of 150mm below the pipe invert of the trench required and 
the void backfilled with Clause 804 granular material in accordance with the Transport IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
86 
 Infrastructure Ireland (formerly National Roads Authority ) Specification f or Road Works. 
The granular bedding material shall be laid above this void backfill material.   
 
All Sewer  pipes  and Rising Mains,  either rigid or flexible, shall be laid on a bed of 
granular material . A minimum bed thickness of 100mm shall be provided for pipes up to 
100mm diameter . A minimum bed thickness of 200mm shall be provided for pipe 
diameters between 150mm and 450mm. Rigid pipes, as a minimum, will be provided 
with a haunch of granular material to half the pipe diamet er height. Flexible pipes shall 
have a haunch of granular material and an additional surround of granular material from 
the top of the granular haunch to a minimum depth of 150mm above the crown of the 
pipe.     
 
Bedding and haunch side fill of granular ma terial shall be placed uniformly underneath 
and on either side of the pipe, in layers not exceeding 100mm, each layer being 
compacted by non-mechanical tamping until the required depth of bedding an d side fill 
has been achieved. Where a full granular pipe surround is required, it shall be placed 
above the side fill material in a similar fashion to bedding and side fill. Surround material 
shall be installed to the required depth above the pipe crown . The  minimum depth of 
pipe surround material above the exte rnal crown of the pipe shall be 150mm at least . 
This depth shall be increased to 300mm where pipes are located adjacent to trafficked 
areas  or where they are installed along roads and footpaths . Care shall be taken that 
the process of placing of the beddin g, side fill and surround material does not displace 
the pipe from its correct line and level.  
 
Where the Sewer or Rising Main is installed along roads and footpaths the minimum 
cover of granular surround material shall be 300mm above the crown of the pipe, 
irrespective of the pipe being either rigid or flexible. The pipe trench above the granular 
surround in this instance shall be backfilled in accordance with the requirements of 
Section 4. 8 below for road and footpath areas. If a Sewer or Rising Main is installed in 
a green field area the minimum cover of granular surround material shall be 200mm 
above the crown of the pipe and the Backfill shall be in accordance with Section 4. 8 
below for green field areas.   
Pipe prot ection measures may be required to address impact from loading in heavily 
trafficked areas and to address minimum pipe cover situations . The detail  shall be 
subject to submission to and assessment by Irish Water before advancing with the 
work.  
 
If the depth of cover to the crown of the pipe is less than the values set out Section 3.9 , 
protection measures shall be provided. Consultation with Irish Water is required in 
relation to the provision of these measures. In order of precedence, the protect ion 
measures may comprise either the provision of a reinforced concrete slab designed to 
spread the imposed traffic load away from the pipe, or the provision of full concrete 
surround, complete with flexible joints, where required, or the use of a ductile iron pipe 
in lieu of the original pipe material, provided there are no service connection in this 
length of pipe. These alternative protection measures shall extend for the distance 
where the depth is below the depth limits outlined above. A combination or  a mix of all IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
87 
 of these additional protection measures may be required and are to be agreed with Irish 
Water. However, the primary approach should be to provide the pipe with the required 
depth of cover as outlined above in Section 3.9.1 to 3.9.6 . 
 
The prot ection slab shall be a minimum of 150mm thick and constructed of C 30/35 
concrete to IS EN 206 and reinforced with high tensile reinforcement to BS 4449.  
 
Concrete  bed, haunch and surrounds of pipes shall be a minimum thickness of 150mm 
away from the exter nal wall of the pipe with an absolute minimum depth of cover above 
the external crown of the pipe of 750mm. The concrete should be C16/20, in 
accordance with IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate , in accordance with IS EN 12620 , with a 
vertical haunch to the mid -point of the pipe, in the case of bed and haunch and vertical 
faces to the full surround. The haunch and surrounds shall be formed using formwork to 
provide a rough cast finish. Expansion joints in the concrete surround shall be provided 
at all joints to allow for pipe flexibility.  
 
The use of a ductile iron pipe in lieu of the original pipe material for the distance where 
the depth is below limits outlined may also be acceptable, provided the depth above the 
crown is not  less than 750mm.  
 
Where soft ground conditions (situations where a Cal ifornia Bearing Ratio  (CBR) less 
than 5 exists) are anticipated or encountered, the soft material shall be excavated and 
disposed to an approved disposal area, in accordance with the W aste Management Act. 
Clause 80 4 granular material , in accordance with the Transport Infrastructure Ireland 
(formerly National Roads Authority) Specification for Road Works, shall replace the 
entire extent of the excavated material . Approved geo -textile wrapping shall be provided 
to this additional backfill. Alternatively, special pipe support arrangements, including 
piling, beam supports, etc., may be required where the depth of soft material is 
excessive. Such arrangements relating t o soft fill material replacement and/or pipe 
supports shall be subject to submission to Irish Water of detailed proposals for review 
and a response from Irish Water indicating agreement is required before advancing with 
the work.   
 
4.8 Backfill             
 
Backfill material shall be placed above the granular surround material described in 
Clause 4. 7 up as far as the underside of the road construction.  
 
The Backfill material shall comprise Clause 804 granular material, in accordance the TII 
“Specification for Road Works”, and it shall be used where the Water Main is installed 
along proposed roadways and footpaths in the Development . If the backfill material is 
within 500mm of a concrete pipe of structure, Clause 808 material shall be used instead 
of Clause 804 material. The use of Clause 804/808 Backfill material shall also appl y 
where the trench is in green areas running within 500mm of roadways and footways. 
The Backfill material shall be placed in layers not exceeding 200mm, each layer being 
compacted to the requirements of the TII Specification for Road Works. The first layer of IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
88 
 backfill above the granular surround shall be compacted in 150mm layers. Mechanical 
compaction equipment shall not be used until there is a minimum of 450mm of 
compacted material above the crown of the pipe.  
 
Alternative Backfill material to that described above (Clause 804 or Clause 808) of the 
pipe trench will only be allowed by Irish Water where the Roads Autho rity in whose 
functional area the Development  is located provides written approval  to the Developer 
for the use of such alternative acceptable material. Evidence of this written approval to 
use alternative acceptable Backfill material shall be provided to Irish Water in advance 
of the commencement of construction on site or in advance of the issue of the 
Connection Agreement , provided construction has not commenced on site . The relevant 
Roads Authority should specify this alternative acceptable Backfill mat erial and this 
should require compliance with the definition of “acceptable material” as outlined in 
Clause 601  of the TII “Specification for Roadworks, Series 600 – Earthworks” , Table 
6/1, with the specific Class of “acceptable  material ” clearly nominated by the relevant 
Roads Authority in the written approval .      
 
Backfill to the pipe trench above the pipe granular surround material and beneath the 
road surface in Public Roads shall be to the requirements of “Guidelines for the 
Opening, Backfilling and Reinstatement of Trenches in Public Road s”, Second Edition, 
or subsequent amendments published by the Department of Transport, Tourism and 
Sport, unless otherwise specified and to the requirements of the relevant Road’s 
Authority’s  Road Opening Licence.  
 
The opening, backfilling and reinstatement of trenches on National Roads shall be in 
accordance with the TII “Specification for the Reinstatement of Openings in National 
Roads” July 2011, unless otherwise specified.  
 
In the case of  any discrepancy between this Code of Practice and the “Guidelines for 
the Opening, Backfilling and Reinstatement of Trenches in Public Roads” or the TII 
“Specification for Road Works” where pipes are located in Public Roads, this Code of 
Practice and thei r associated Standard Details shall take precedence.        
 
Selected excavated material may be used as trench backfill in green -field areas above 
the granular pipe surround material with the approval of Irish Water.  This selected back 
fill shall comply w ith the requirements of “acceptable material” as outlined in Clause 601 
of the TII “Specification for Roadworks, Series 600 – Earthworks”, Table 6/1, Class 8, 
Class 2 (Miscellaneous Fill) and is generally referred to as Type B fill. It shall be 
uniformly compactable material free from clay lumps greater than 75mm, stones greater 
than 40mm, tree roots, vegetable matter, any kind of building rubbish, etc. This material 
shall be placed  in layers not exceeding 300mm in depth and compacted in accor dance 
with the Transport Infrastructure Ireland (formerly National Roads Authority) 
Specification for Road Works.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
89 
 Where Sewer  pipelines are installed traversing a public road, the backfill material above 
the granular surround shall comprise cement bound g ranular material (CBGM), 
Category B, in accordance with the TII “Specification for Road Works”, Series 800.  
 
4.9 Anchor/Thrust/Support Blocks for Rising Main s 
 
Gentle curves may be formed in the Rising Main  pipeline by angular deflection of the 
pipe joint. The maximum angular deflection of each joint shall not exceed the 
manufacturer’s recommendation. At the locations detailed below, where pipes need to 
be restrained against movement under pressure, concrete  thrust blocks shall be 
provided. Concrete thrust blocks shall be positioned symmetrically with respect to the 
connecting pipe or bend.  
 
Appropriate thrust blocks shall be designed and installed on Rising Main s where 
required. Except where welded polyethylene pipes or self-anchoring joints are used, 
thrusts f rom bends and branches in Rising Main  shall be resisted by concrete thrust 
blocks cast in contact with undisturbed ground. The thrust blocks shall be designed in 
accordance with CIRIA Re port 128, “Guide to the Design of Thrust Blocks for Buried 
Pressure Pipelines”. The requirements for thrust blocks for polyethylene pipes shall be 
based on the manufacturer’s advice.  
 
Anchor and support blocks shall be constructed with concrete, C20/ 25, in accordance 
with IS EN 206 , 20mm aggregate size, in accordance with IS EN 12620 . The thrust 
blocks shall be formed using formwork to provide a rough cast finish.  Anchor/thrust 
blocks shall be provided on Rising Main s at bends of curvature of 11.5 degrees  or 
greater , at both sides of air valve chambers, at any abrupt change in vertical or 
horizontal direction, at scour fittings and at any location where liquid  pressure is likely to 
distort the pipe line installation or cause disproportionate movement. Plas tic and 
polyethylene pipes shall be wrapped in a compressible filler board, in accordance with 
IS EN 6 22-1 and IS EN 6 22-4, with an outer  plastic sheeting having a composition in 
accordance with BS 6076 before being cast against or into anchor/thrust blocks .   
 
Concrete support blocks shall be cast to scour valve tees and air valve fittings installed 
on polyethylene pipe lines in order to resist torque forces imposed on the fittings during 
operation. Anti torque support blocks will only be required on sluice valves associated 
with ductile iron pipe fittings of 150mm and above . Support blocks shall be cast so as 
not to interfere with the operation and maintenance of the apparatus. In general support 
blocks shall not cover pipe or fitting joints. Where th is is unavoidable, the fittings/bolts 
shall be wrapped in protective, non -biodegradable, tape.  
 
All thrust/anchor/support blocks shall be allowed to develop adequate strength before 
any internal pressure is applied to the pipeline.  
 
Support blocks of con crete grade C25/30 , in accordance with IS EN 206 , 20mm 
aggregate size , in accordance with IS EN 12620 , or special pipe support arrangements, 
including piling, beam supports, etc., are required where Rising Main  pipes are laid in IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
90 
 boggy or swampy conditions. Special support blocks are also required to anchor pipes 
where gradients are 1:6 or greater. Design of supports, piles, ground beams should be 
provided to Irish Water for assessment  and review  and additional information may be 
required to complete this assessment . Pipe joints shall allow for longitudinal movement 
due to thermal effects and thrusts due to internal pressure.  
 
The Developer shall advise and seek review by Irish Water’s Connection and Developer 
Services where it is proposed to install rising mains with gradients that are steeper than 
1:10. Alternative gradient proposals may be required in such instances.  
While a nchorage is required to resist thrust, it is not necessarily required at junctions or 
bends where a fully i ntegrated fusion weld PE pipe system is in place. However, the 
provision of suitable anchors at bends in excess of 22.5 degrees on fully integrated 
fusion weld PE pipe systems shall be provided in accordance with the pipe 
manufacturer’s recommendations and  requirements. Compressible filler board, in 
accordance with the provisions of IS EN 622, Part 1 to Part 4, wrapped in plastic 
sheeting having a composition in accordance with BS 6076, shall be provided for 
protection between the concrete and the polyethyl ene pipe . Bituminous material shall 
not be allowed come in contact with polyethylene pipes.  
 
4.10 Testing of Gravity Sewer s and Manhole s  
       
The Works  shall be tested  by the Developer  as work progresses and on completion of 
construction  of specific pipe lengths . The main pipeline shall be air or water tested in 
accordance with the requirements of IS EN 752  and IS EN 1610 . On completion of the 
construction works, all pipelines shall be thoroughly cleaned and all deleterious material 
remov ed. The test of  Gravity  Sewer s and Manhole s shall be conducted in the presence 
of representatives of Irish Water or its agents. A  Gravity  Sewer  condition survey (CCTV) 
shall be carried out by a competent inspection contractor  in accordance with Section 
1.9 above .  
 
The pipe test shall be conducted after the  Gravity Sewer  is installed and jointed and 
before any concreting or backfilling commences. A further test will be carried out after 
the backfilling is completed and a further test may be requested after any connections 
have been made to the Sewer  system.  
 
The air test shall be carried out in accordance with IS EN 1610, to either LA or LC  
requirements as outlined in Table 3  of IS EN 1610 . The LA air test will generally be 
applied and involves the pumping in of air to the gravity pipework  until a pressure of 
100mm of water is indicated on a U -tube connected to the system. The pipe is left  to 
stand for 5 minutes to permit pressure stabilisation before commencement of the test. A 
drop of less than 25mm over a period of a further 5 to 7 minutes, depending on the pipe 
diameter, without further pumping, will give rise to a positive test result. An air test to LC 
standards as outlined in Table 3 of IS EN 1610 will be required where the water t able is 
likely to be high . This involves the pumping in of air to the gravity pipework until a 
pressure of 1000mm of water is applied . The pipe is left to stand for 5 minutes to permit IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
91 
 pressure stabilisation before commencement of the test. A drop of less than 150mm 
over a period of a further 3 to 4 minutes, depending on the pipe diameter, without 
further pumping, will give rise to a positive test result. The air test shall be conducted in 
the presence of an Irish Water field engineer or an Irish Water agen t’s supervisor.  
 
Failure of the air test is not conclusive when  failure does occur, a CCTV survey shall be 
carried out to identify the defect in the  Gravity Sewer  indicate s the repairs required. 
Following the rectification of the defect, a water test shall be carried out. Acceptance or 
rejection of the pipe shall be based on the results of the water test.  
 
The water test is to be carried out in accordance with the requiremen ts of I.S. EN 1610. 
The water test involves the filling of the pipeline to a depth of 1.0m above the crown at 
the high end Manhole  of the pipe while ensuring that the water level above the crown of 
the pipe at the lower end does not exceed a depth of 5.0m. Steeply graded pipelines 
shall be tested in stages in cases where the maximum head, as stated above, would be 
exceeded if the whole of the section were tested in one length.  
 
The pipeline shall be filled with water and allowed to stand for a minimum period of one  
hour after filling to allow absorption, topping up as necessary  to the original level , before 
starting the test. The test shall be conducted for a period of 30 minutes. The rate of 
water loss shall not exceed 0.15 litres/m2 (m2 refers to the total area of the wetted 
internal surface) where pipelines are tested on their own . On that basis the maximum 
water loss for a 100m length of Sewer  over the test period would be 7.5 litres for a 
150mm pipe, 11.5 litres for a 225mm pipe, 15 litres for a 300 mm pipe, etc. This 
threshold water loss may be interpolated from the above for the various l ength s of the 
Sewer  under test between Manhole s. Where pipelines and Manhole s are tested 
together, the rate of water loss shall not exceed 0 .2 litres/m2 (m2 refers to the total area 
of the wetted internal surface). The water test shall be conducted in the presence of an 
Irish Water field engineer or an Irish Water agent’s supervisor.  
 
Manhole s shall be tested after construction by means of a water test  for infiltration and 
exfiltration . The proportion of Manhole s to be tested in each Development  will be at the 
discretion of the Irish Water field engineer and will depend on the number of Manhole s 
being provided. The number of Manhole s to be tested will b e advised by the Irish Water 
field engineer to the Developer. Manhole s shall be substantially watertight with no 
discernible water loss  out of or infiltration into the structure.  
 
The exfiltration test requirement for water tightness of Manhole s shall be carried out in 
accordance with IS EN 1610. The test comprises the following:  
 
 Filling the Manhole  up to the up to the soffit level of the cover slab below ground 
level of the Manhole , 
 Allowing the water to set for a period to allow for conditioning, usuall y 1 hour is 
sufficient, a longer period may be required in dry weather.  
 Water test the Manhole  for a duration of 30 minutes (+/ - I minute)  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
92 
  Test requirement is satisfied if the amount of water added to bring the water level 
up to its original position is l ess than 0.4 l itres/m2 of wetted internal surface area.  
 
The exfiltration test shall be carried out before backfilling of the Manhole  and when the 
cast concrete Manhole  or the surround of pre -cast ring Manhole s is in place and cured.  
 
The infiltration test shall to be carried out in accordance with Clause 7.8 of the Civil 
Engineering Specification for the Water Industry (CESWI) , subject to any amendments 
outlined below . This test is to be carried out after backfilling around the Manhole . The 
infiltratio n test may also be carried out on the pipeline alone or on the Manhole  and the 
pipeline. Again the Manhole  and the pipeline shall be backfilled. The test is as follows.  
 
 All inlets to the Manhole  (or the Manhole  and pipeline) are effectively closed off.  
 For the infiltration test on the Manhole  only, the test requirement is satisfied if the 
amount of water leaking into the Manhole  in a 30 minute period does not exceed 
0.4 litres per square meter of wetted internal surface area of the Manhole .  
 For the infil tration test on the pipelines only, the test requirement is satisfied if the 
amount of water leaking into the pipeline in a 30 minute period does not exceed 
0.15 litres per square meter of wetted internal surface area of the pipeline . 
 If the pipeline and t he Manhole  are being checked for infiltration, the test 
requirement is satisfied if the amount of water leaking into the Manhole  and 
pipeline in a 30 minute period does not exceed 0.2 litres per square meter of 
wetted internal surface area of the pipeline and the Manhole .  
 
All visible leaks from or inflow into the Manhole  shall be repaired.  Remedial works will 
be required if these results are not achieved and the te sts rerun. Following the water 
test, pipelines and structures shall be emptied and the water disposed in an 
environmentally safe manner. All water used for testing shall be clean and free from 
impurities. Discharge of the test water to Network shall not ta ke place without Irish 
Water’s express approval.    
 
Pipes not within the Attendant Grounds,  which will be  the responsibility of  individual  
property owners, should also be tested to achieve a satisfactory air test result  in 
accordance with the relevant section of the Technical Guidance Document associated 
with the Building Regulations .  
 
Pipes not wi thin the Attendant Grounds will be the responsibility of individual owners 
shall be dye tested to trace the pipe and ensure proper connectivity to the appropriate 
Network s (Wastewater  Drain s to the Wastewater  Sewer  and storm Drain s to the S torm 
Water  Sewer ). The Irish Water field engineer  may instruct the Developer to  carry out 
random inspections and dye surveys (and CCTV surveys, if necessary) to confirm the 
proper connection of the services to the Network s. These surveys shall be carried out at 
the Developer’s cost and in the presence of the Irish Water field enginee r, if deemed 
necessary. Any misconnection of drains to Sewers shall be rectified and connections 
made to the proper collection pipework system.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
93 
 4.11 Pressure Testing of Rising Main s 
 
4.11.1 General  
 
The Rising Main  shall be pressure tested following installation of the pressure main on 
site. The pressure tests shall be conducted by the Developer ’s contractor experienced 
in such testing procedures in the presence of an Irish Water’s field engineer or an Irish 
Water agent’s supervisor .  
 
Rising Main s shall be tested after they are jointed and before full backfilling commences 
in as far as practicable. During testing, sufficient backfilling material shall be provided 
above the pipe crown to resist uplift or buckling mo vement of the pipe and all joints shall 
be exposed.  
 
Testing shall be carried out between suitably supported blank end pieces. Testing 
between ‘live’ shut valves will not be accepted. Before testing, valves shall be chec ked 
and sealed, the section of Rising Main  filled with water and the air released. Water used 
for testing should be obtained from the existing water supply system. This  water  will be 
provided, subject to availability, by Irish Water at the Developer ’s expense.  
 
The following general requirements are relevant:  
 
 To avoid airlocks there must be suitable air valves on the pipeline,  
 Filling must proceed slowly, preferably from the lower side,  
 The test must be hydrostatic and shall take place between blank flanges. bolted 
or welded to pipe ends or end caps fully supported by anchor blocks,  
 All pressure gauges used for the monitoring of tests must be plate sized pressure 
gauges or digital loggers with an appropriate pressure range consistent with the 
pressure being measured, properly calibrat ed with calibration records available 
for inspection, to ensure that any losses can be adequately monitored.  
 
All the exposed parts of the pipeline, including the chambers, shall be visually checked 
and any leaks or damp spots rectified.  
 
Any water used f or testing shall be disposed of in a safe and environmentally suitable 
fashion. All water used for testing shall be clean and free from impurities. Discharge of 
the test water to Network shall not take place without Irish Water’s express approval.  
 
4.11.2 Testing of Ductile Iron Pressure Pipelines  
Testing of Ductile Iron Rising Mains shall be undertaken in accordance with IGN 4 -01-
03, Guide to Testing of Pressure Pipes and Fittings for Use by Public Water Supplie rs, 
October 2015. A formal test report , to the requirements of Irish Water, shall be 
submitted to Irish Water Field Engineers giving the complete details of the test that was IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
94 
 carried out in accordance with Section 4 of IGN 4 -01-03, regardless of the result of the 
test.  
 
The system t est pressu re (STP) on the Ductile Iron Rising Main shall be 1.5 times  MDP 
at the lowest point of the pipe. MDP is a pressure equivalent to the sum of the maximum 
continuous operating pressure of the pipeline plus an allowance for surge pressure. The 
allowance for surge pressure, where this is not known, shall not  be less than 2 bar. The 
maximum continuous operating pressure of the pipeline may not be known in every 
case. In any event, the system test pressure on the Ductile Iron Main shall be at least 
10 bar . 
 
In all instances, the test pressure should not be greater than 1.5 times the maximum 
pressure of the lowest rated component (the pressure that a component can withstand 
continuously in service).   
 
A preliminary test phase shall be carried when testing Ductile Iron pressure pipelines 
where the pressure is taken to the operating pressure (without exceeding specific test 
pressure (STP)) to:  
 
A) Stabilise the part of the pipeline to be tested by allowing most of the time 
dependent movements.  
B) Achieve an appropriate saturation with water when using water absorbing 
materials (e.g . cement linings on iron pipes).  
 
For iron pipes with epoxy lining  the settlement test should be completed in 15 minutes. 
Where Ductile Iron pipes have cement linings, the Rising Main  should be allowed to 
‘settle’ for a 24 hour period .  
 
The pressure in the pipeline shall then be raised steadily until the specified test 
pressure is reached in the lowest part of the section and the pressure shall be 
maintained at this level, by pumping if necessary, for a period of one hour. If there is 
less than 1% air in the main, the pressure should rise at a uniform rate.  
 
The pump shall then be disconnected, and no further water shall be permitted to enter 
the pipeline for a further period of one ho ur. At the end of this period, a record of the 
pressure will be made  by the testing contractor . The original pressure shall be then 
restored by pumping and the loss measured by drawing off water from the pipeline until 
the pressure as recorded at the end o f the test is again reached.  The acceptance 
criteria for the pressure test shall be those outlined in Section 6.4, Table 2, of IGN 4 -01-
03.  
 
If the pipe fails to meet the acceptance criteria, the test shall be stopped and the excess 
water bled carefully f rom the system until only static head remains. A search for the 
potential leak should be initiated. After leaks are found and repaired, the test shall be 
repeated.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
95 
 In addition to any tests on separate sections, the whole pipeline shall be tested on 
completion to the same pressure and by the same procedure as that outlined for 
individual sections.  
 
4.11.3  Testing of Polyethylene Pipelines  
It is not necessary to have any preliminary test for polyethylene (PE) pipes. The amount 
of exposed pipe shall be  kept to a minimum to reduce the effect of temperature 
changes. The testing of PE Pressure Pipelines which are not coiled pipes or where all 
the joints are not visible during the test shall be carried out in accordance with the 
requirements of IGN 4 -01-03, Guide to Testing of Pressure Pipes and Fittings for Use 
by Public Water Supplie rs, October 2015. A formal test report , to the requirements of 
Irish Water,  shall be submitted to Irish Water field engineers giving the complete details 
of the test that was carried out in accordance with Section 4 of IGN 4 -01-03, regardless 
of the result of the test.   
 
The system test pressure (STP) on the PE Rising Main shall be 1.5 times MDP at the 
lowest point of t he pipe. MDP is a pressure equivalent to the sum of the maximum 
continuous operating pressure of the pipeline plus an allowance for surge pressure. The 
allowance for surge pressure, where this is not known, shall not be less than 2 bar. The 
maximum continu ous operating pressure of the pipeline may not be known in every 
case. In any event, the system test pressure on the PE Rising Main shall be at least 10 
bar. 
 
The maximum system test pressure sh all not exceed  1.5 times the maximum rated 
pressure (maximum pressure that a component can withstand continuously in service) 
of the lowest rated component.  
 
Mechanical fittings are usually only tested to 20 bar. If the onsite test pressure is to 
exceed this, a check s hall be carried out to ensure that the fittings can withstand the 
pressure for the test duration.  
 
The acceptance criteria for the pressure test shall be those outlined in Section 5.4.4 of 
IGN 4 -01-03. If the pipe fails to meet the acceptance criteria, the  test shall be stopped 
and the excess water bled carefully from the system. A search for the potential leak 
shall be initiated. After leaks are found and repaired, the test shall be repeated, but only 
after a time greater than four times the total original  test time has elapsed to allow for 
complete creep deformation recovery.  
 
All electro fusion jointing and testing shall be in accordance with WIS -4-32-08, 
Specification for the Fusion Jointing of Polyethylene Pressure Pipeline Systems Using 
PE80 and PE100 materials . For all saddle joints a 2 minute hydraulic test at 18 Bar shall 
be applied to the fused fitting prior to tapping in accordance with WIS -4-32-08. 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
96 
 4.12 Connections  
 
The mode of connection and layout of any junctions or connections between pipes, 
whether at Manhole s, inspection chambers, access points or otherwise shall be 
designed to minimise the risk of blockage. Where feasible, connections shall be to 
Manhole s and n ot directly to the Works . In all cases a private side inspection chamber 
is required on each wastewater service connection in accordance with Section 3.11.14  
above.   
 
As far as practicable, junctions and connections shall be built in for all planned users  
when Sewer s are constructed to avoid damage to the Sewer  by installing connections at 
a later date when the system is live. Where it is necessary to make a post -construction 
connection the upstream end of any unused connection should be sealed until required. 
Where there is a Manhole  adjacent, the connection sh ould be made to the Manhole . 
Where there is no Manhole , it may be necessary to construct a new Manhole .  
 
The vertical angle between the service connecting pipe and the horizontal shall be 
between 30°  degrees and 90°. 
 
Where the connection is being made to  a Sewer  with a nominal internal diameter of 
300mm diameter or less, connections shall be made using 45° angle Y branch 
junctions.  
 
Retrospective c onnections made with junction fittings shall be made by cutting the 
existing pipe, inserting the junction fi tting, and jointing with flexible repair couplings or 
slip couplers.  
 
For connection s being made to a Sewer  with a nominal internal diameter greater than 
300 mm , the following shall apply :  
 
a) where the diameter of the connecting pipe is greater than half the diameter of 
the Sewer , an access Manhole  should be constructed to form the Connection 
Point . or,  
b) where the diameter of the connecting pipe is less than or equal to half the 
diameter of the Sewer , then the connection should be made using a preformed 
Y-branch  fitting with a 45 deg. long radius bend to form the connection to the 
Works   
 
Connections made with saddle fittings to concrete pipes shall be made by cutting and 
safely removing a core from the pipe and jointing the saddle fitting to the pipe in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to ensure a watertight joint. The 
connecting pipe shall not protrude into the Sewer . Connections to P VC or structured 
wall pipes shall be achieved by installing junction connections pieces as the pipe is 
installed.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
97 
 The use of 90° Y-branch or saddle connections to the Sewer may be allowed, subject to 
Irish Water review, provided the branch or saddle incorporates a swept connection to 
direct Wastewater in the same direction of flow in the Sewer. Saddle connection s shall 
only to be provided for connections to existing Sewers, subject to Irish Water approval.  
 
The service connection pipe between the Sewer connection fitting and the property 
Curtilage  boundary shall be installed with  generally no more than two long radius 45 
deg. bends  to orientate the service connection  from horizontal to vertical towards the 
Sewer connection point . It shall be tested to achieve a satisfactory air test result as 
outlined in Section 4.10  above.  
 
4.13 Protection against Flooding  
 
The layout of the Works shall minimise the risk of damage to property from flooding in 
the event of excessive flows, blockage, or failure of pumping stations on the system.  
  
Flooding caused by blockages of Wastewater  pipes  shall have identified flow paths and 
shall not cause internal property flooding.  
 
In designing the Development ’s site layout and the Works , designers shall also 
demonstrate flow paths and the potential effects of flooding resulting from blockages, 
pumping station failure or surcharging in downstream combined Sewer s, by checking 
the ground levels around the likely points that wastewater would flow from the system, 
to identify the flood routes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
98 
 Part 5 – Pumping Stations  
 
5.1  Pumping Stations Provision          
 
It may be necessary to i ncorporate pumping stations in the Works . This Section of the 
Code of Practice outlines Irish Water’s requirements on such installations.  
 
These requirements apply to small to medium sized pumping stations which will be 
designated as Type 1, Type 2 and Type 3 pump stations in the following Sections. 
Small pumping stations, designated as Type 1, are those serving typically five dwellings 
or less. Pumping stations serving  typically six t o twenty dwellings are  designated as 
Type 2, will be regarded as mid -range sized pumping stations. Medium sized pumping 
facilities are designated as Type 3 will serve more than twenty dwellings with an upper 
limit overall power capacity of less than 20kW installed power . 
 
Pumping stations of large capacity are not normally required in Development s that are 
the subject of this document. These higher capacity pumping stations also require the 
speci fic approval of Irish Water. The specific requirements associated with these types 
of pumping stations are not covered in this Code of Practice . 
 
5.2  General Requirements  
 
The design of the Works  shall minimise the use of energy over the whole operational life 
cycle of the system. However, there may be a necessity to collect Wastewater  in low 
lying areas and lift it to a Gravity Sewer  or to a pipe connected  to the ultimate treatment 
location.    
 
Wastewater  pumping stations or pumped systems shall only be used where their whole 
life cost is less than the cost of conventional g ravity systems over a period of 40 years, 
based on a Net Present Value (NPV) assessment , and where the proposed Wastewater  
system is consistent with Irish Water’s technical design vetting assessment acceptance . 
Full gravity Works  shall be provided unless the physical conditions of the site do not 
allow this.  Pumping stations will only be Vested by Irish Water where the Developer  can 
provide clear evidence that  a pumping station is required as outlined above in the 
Design Submission , Section 2.3 .   
 
In all cases, the impact on the downstream in frastructure, existing Sewers, p umping 
stations and Wastewater treatment plants, shall be taken into consideration when 
proposing and designing pumping stations. It may be necessary to curtail the discharge 
rate, provide balanced storage, etc. to limit the impact of the pump station operation on 
the downstream infrastructure.  
 
Pumping stations shall be fully automat ed with provision made for future remote 
monitoring by telemetry  as outlined below in Section 5. 26. A dedicated, metered, power 
supply shall be provided to the pump station with a separate billing account. No other IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
99 
 equipment, site lighting system, etc., outside the curtilage of the site shall be served 
from this metered power supply.  
 
All pumping station plant and equipment shall be fully tested to ensure adequacy and to 
establish that the pumping station as a whole is fit for purpose for its intended us e. The 
testing shall be carried out with water before allowing Wastewater  into the facility. A full 
operational test of all pumps, pump controls, pump protection devices, telemetry 
systems, etc. shall be demonstrated to Irish Water personnel prior to commissioning of 
the plant with Wastewater  and the results of these tests shal l be included in the Final 
Documentation .  
 
All operation and m aintenan ce m anuals, As -Constructed Drawings, Control Panel 
Wiring Diagrams, Control Philosophies, Safety File, etc. shall be provided as part of the 
Final Documentation to Irish Water personnel  prior to commissioning in accordance with 
Section 5.24  of this Code of Practice.  
 
The ownership of the pumping station structures and associated plant , kiosks, 
Chambers, etc. shall only vest in Irish Water on issue of the Conformance Certificate. 
The land on which the pumping station and associated plant is located shall be the 
subject to a Grant of Deed of Easement for the benefit of Irish Water . The access route 
and parking areas associ ated with the pumping station shall be the subject of a Right of 
Way Agreement. Arrangements for Vesting of the completed Pumping Station  shall be 
in accordance with Irish Water requirements  as outlined in the Connection Agreement .  
 
To ensure that Wastewater  flooding does not occur at or upstream of the pumping 
station during normal operation or during plant or power failure, additional storage shall 
be provided at all pumping stations . This storage shall be prov ided above the highest 
pump cut in le vel and shall ensure that surcharging of the collection system does not 
impact any existing or possible future connections . The required emergency storage 
capacity will depend on the size of the Development . Emergency storage capacity of 
24-hour of Dry Wea ther Flow  is required for smaller Development s of up to 2 50 units. 
The emergency storage requirement will be reduced for larger developments in 
accordance with Section 5.11  below . Storage capacity in the Sewer  or Manhole s may 
be utilised and calculations shall be provided at design stage. These storage tanks can 
give rise to septicity and odour. Therefore, the provision of such facilities shall ensure 
that these risks have been adequately and satisfactorily addressed.  
 
5.3  Specific Minimum Requirements  
 
Specific minimum requirements for pumping stations are as follows:  
 
5.3.1  Pump stations to have a minimum of two submersible pumps.  
5.3.2  All pipework and fittings within the pump station shall be ductile iron to IS 
EN 598 , with appropriate colour and marking . 
5.3.3  Pumps to be provided on a duty/standby control arrangement or if more 
than two pumps required, the arrangement to be duty/assist/standby.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
100 
 5.3.4  Plate to be provided in the kiosk to allow nomination of the pump s (e.g. 
Pump No 1, Pump No 2, etc.).  
5.3.5  Electrical, co ntrol and telemetry equipment  and installation to  be carried 
out in accordance with Section 5.16  to Section 5.27  below.   
5.3.6  Electrical and control equipment to be located in a vandal resistant  kiosk 
or structure situated adjacent to but offset from the pumping station .  
5.3.7  Emergency Wastewater  storage capacity to be provided  in all pumping 
stations and  equipped with appropriate  self-cleaning wash -down facilities,  
along septicity and odour mitigation provisions . 
5.3.8  Access for operation and maintenance vehicles , including vacuum tanker 
vehicles, to be provided.  
5.3.9  A dedicated, metered, power supply to be provided to the pump station 
serving only the pump station equipment and associated plant.  
5.3.10  The pump station shall be made ready to facilitate the installation of 
telemetry plant for data reporting to Irish Water central facility.  
5.3.11  Alert system and call out emergency response to be provided in the event 
of plant breakdown or malfunction.  
5.3.12  Flow metering facilities to be provided on the Rising Main  as appropriate , 
complete with meter chamber, isolating sluice valves, etc. . 
5.3.13  Odour control equipment to be provided to eliminate the risk of odour 
nuisance arising , comprising a vent -column, complete with passive odour 
control.  
5.3.14  Lifting equipment to be provided for the removal of plant and equipment  
(See Section 5.3 0 below) .  
5.3.15  Safety equipment , comprising lifting davit, safety harness, etc.  to be 
provided for controlled and planned safe access  for the wet well.  
5.3.16  Pump stations wet well and valve chamber to be provided with  pipework, 
to allow emptying of the Rising Main  and wet well by a vacuum tanker:    
5.3.17  Suitable safe access to all components  of the pump station,  including all 
operational chambers, inlet manhole, wet well, valve chamber and flow 
meter chamber, for operating,  maintenance and possible future 
replacement.  
5.3.18  Safe working areas around the various components of the pumping 
station , as listed in Section 5.3.17  above. .  
 
5.4  Layout of Pumping Station          
 
Subject to Planning Permission requirement, t he layout of the pumping station site and 
access road shall be arranged so that:  
 
5.4.1  There is sufficient space to acc ommodate a vacuum tanker off road, and  a 
large van or a mobile pump/generator within the site.  
5.4.2  There is sufficient space between the various units on the site to enable 
maintenance operations and equipment replacement to be carried out, 
especially between the pump station sump/valve chamber and control 
equipment kiosk or structure.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
101 
 5.4.3  There is sufficient space to carry out the chosen method of pump 
maintenance  and installation of temporary pumps.  
5.4.4  The doors to control kiosk(s) open safely and provide sufficient room for 
operators to safely carry out maintenance , repairs  or replacement .  
5.4.5  The need for personnel entry to confined spaces is minimised.  
5.4.6  The inlet pipe is above the highest cut in level of the pumping plant units.   
5.4.7  The pump delivery pipework within the wet well is preferably opposite to the 
inlet Sewer  with sufficient baffling facilities , comprising stainless steel baffle 
plate and stainless steel associated fixings, to protect the pumping plant.  
5.4.8  The access is sufficiently wide to accommodate a vacuum tanker , a large 
van or a mobile pump/generator.  
5.4.9  Access is provided to the pumping station site is via the access road  
suitably designed and constructed  for such access with appropriate safe 
sight distances .  
5.4.10  Adequate site security  and emergency lighting , using LED,  is provided to 
achieve 100 lux at ground level, with intensity adjustment appropriate for 
the site location, complete with photoelectric cell controller and over -ride 
control switch.  
5.4.11  No overhead obstructions or electrical cables are located at  or near the site  
that could pose a risk of electrocution, as outlined by a safety risk 
assessment .  
5.4.12  The location of the pumping station is not susceptible to flooding.  
5.4.13  Security fencing will not be required except in exceptional circumstances as 
outlined in Section 5 .6 below.  
 
The site of the pumping station and access road thereto shall be of sufficient width, 
gradient and suitably surfaced to ensure reasonable access for Irish Water vehicles, 
plant and operatives and to facilitate the various maintenance operations , including 
emptying of contents, provision of stand -by generation plant, etc.  
 
Before the location of a pumping station is decided, the Developer  shall consult with the 
electricity and telecommunications providers on the availability and cost of providing the 
requisite power supply, the supply characteristi cs, the security of supply and Easement . 
The Developer  shall also carry out a GMS signal strength survey  for 3G  for the 
telemetry system at the station can be transmitted from the transmitter an d received at 
the reception point. The electricity and telecommunic ations supply arrangements and 
GSM  survey shall be the Developer ’s responsibility and cost  and these shall be 
provided for the exclusive operation of the pumping station .  
 
The last access Manhole  on the Gravity Sewer  system upstream of the pumping station 
shall be located adjacent to the wet well within the site of the pumping station 
compound. It shall be designed to allow for over -pumping of the influent. Th is inlet 
Manhole  upstream of the wet well shall be fitted with a hand operated isolating 
penstock.  
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
102 
 5.5  Location of Pumping Station         
 
Small pumping stations  (Type 1)  shall be located no closer than 5.0m  to a property 
boundary in order to minimise the risk of odour, noise and vibration nuisance. This 
distance shall be increased to 10.0m  for mid -range sized pumping stations (Type 2) and 
to 15m for medium sized pumping stations  (Type 3) . The distance shall be measured 
from the pumping station site boundary to the boundary of the nearest habitable , 
commercial, industrial or mixed use property. This distance may be subject to change 
depending on local circumstances and early discussions with the Planning Autho rity and 
Irish Water. Facilities for odour control shall be installed ( comprising a vent stack with 
passive and/or forced odour control systems) to ensure that  the pumping station will not 
create odour nuisance impact due to being located in close proximity to dwellings and 
public areas. The site layout shall included and indicate the requisite dimensional 
requirements from adjoining property boundaries, location of odour control unit/vent 
stack.  
 
The pumping station shall not be located within a public or private road, at the end of 
private driveways, in locations which may be used for vehicle parking, in places where 
maintenance work may obstruct rights or way, emergency vehicle access or w here 
there is a risk of harm at the pumping station from moving vehicles to operatives 
carrying out maintenance , renewal, replacement and upgrade activities. The location 
shall be chosen so as to allow safe and reasonable vehicular access for the purpose o f 
repair and maintenance. Long reversing access ways are not acceptable. Ideally, the 
access to a pumping station should be from a public road or by the provision of a 
dedicated access road from the public road. Shared access with domestic driveways is 
not deemed suitable. The access road gradient shall be as level as possible or within 
acceptable road gradient appropriate for the maintenance vehicle(s) requiring access to 
the site.  
 
Provision shall be made for access by a tanker to empty the contents of t he wet well 
and any storage facility in the event of failure. The tanker size will depend on that which 
is available to Irish Water or its agents for emptying of the facility but access for Heavy 
Goods Vehicles, such as an 18 m3 tanker , shall be provided as a minimum. Access for 
the provision of stand -by power generation plant shall also be made available. The size 
of the standby power unit will be dependent on the pumping capacity of the station.  
 
The pumping station shall not be located in areas that are susceptible to flooding at a 
frequency of more than 1:30 year recurrence.  The pumping station facility shall be 
designed for inundation. The finished slab level of the pumping station shall be 
positioned above the 1:100 ye ar flood level.  All electrical control equipment shall be 
housed in suitably IP rated enclosures  and positioned above the 1:200 year flood level. 
A Flood Risk Assessment confirming compliance with this Section 5.5  of this Code of 
Practice dealing with flo od risk analysis, as required in the Design Submission, if 
applicable, as outlined in Section 2.3 above.   
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
103 
 5.6  Fencing and Boundary Security         
 
It should be noted that the Local Authority Planning Department may determine the 
requirements for fencing, site layout, control plant kiosk/structure, etc. under the 
Planning Permission. The pumping station shall be secure in its own right without 
having to rely on security fencing. Kiosks and access covers shall be locked and secure 
in their own right.  
 
Fencing of pumping stations  sites is not required by Irish Water and will only be 
necessary in exceptional circumstances . Irish Water shall be consulted in relation to the 
need or otherwise for the fencing of pumping station sites and its decision will be 
determined having considered public safety, the likelihood of vandalism, the depth of 
the pumping station structures, the extent and type of  pedestrian traffic and whether 
special activities are taking place on the site.  
 
If security fencing is required, it shall comprise a 2.4m high, corrosion resistant palisade 
fencing. In particular situation s, subject to Irish Water approval, wire mesh fe ncing  may 
be required . The security rating shall be in accordance with Irish Water’s security policy 
and the fence security rating is to be agreed with Irish Water in advance.  
 
Palisade fencing , where provided,  shall comply with IS EN 1722 -12, comprising 1 7 No , 
2.5mm thick , pales, with 95mm gaps, welded to 2 no mild steel rails (50mm x 50mm x  
5mm angles). The steel rails shall be fixed to vertical posts (100mm x 55mm RSJ 
sections), which are provided at 2.7m centres. Fixings shall comprise mild steel anti 
vandal bolts and nuts. The fencing units shall be hot dipped galvanised to IS EN 1461 
(2009) and subsequently electrostatically powder coated in a plant complying to EN 
1722 -16.  
 
Wire mesh fencing , where provided, s hall comply with IS EN 1772 -14, comprising an 
868 mesh system (200mm x 50mm spacing) with a galvanised and plastic coated finish . 
The mesh shall be clamp fixed to 60mm x 60mm posts at 2,500mm centres.  
 
The fence panels shall be fixed to fence pillars . Cor ner pillars shall be braced in both 
directions. All fixing b olts shall be tamper resistant or burred over. The fence, pillars, 
bracing, runners, diagonals, gate posts and gates , etc.  shall be in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instruction and the designs shall be provided to Irish Water for review 
and vetting. The gate posts, pillars and bracing shall be supported in concrete bases, 
Grade C30/37 to IS EN 206, of suitable size to re sist imposed loadings.  
 
Similar type access gates to the palisade or wire mesh fencing panels, as appropriate, 
shall be provided. The access gates shall be of sufficient width to accommodate 
maintenance vehicles, tankers, etc. The access gates shall be pr ovided with slide bolts, 
shooting bolts and padlocks. If opening outwards, the access gates shall be set back 
from parking and access areas by the width of the leaf of the gate.  Gate hinges shall be 
designed so that it is impossible to remove the gate by l ifting when it is closed and 
locked in position. Drop bolts shall be fitted to each gate leaf in such a way that they IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
104 
 cannot be removed but that they allow the gate to be secured in both the open and 
closed position. In certain circumstances, a pedestrian gate shall be provided in the 
security fence if required by Irish Water.  
 
Anti-burrow features shall be provided for circumstances where Enhanced Security is 
required by the provision of a 300mm wide by 150mm deep concrete sill along the base 
of the fence  line. The sill shall be formed using in -situ reinforced concrete, Grade 
C25/30 to IS EN 206.  All fence material and workmanship shall be in accordance with 
IS EN 1722 -14.  
 
The colour of the fence, access gates and Accessories  shall be holly green 14C39 in 
accordance with BS 4800.  
 
In certain circumstances, a 2.4m high security wall may be deemed adequate so as to 
match surrounding structures. In this circumstance, a steel access gate shall be 
provided as outlined above.  
 
5.7  On-Site Parking and Hard -Standing         
 
It shall be noted that the Local Authority Planning Department may determine the 
requirements for on -site parking under the Planning Permission. Small , medium  and 
mid-range sized pumping stations located off public roads with adequate parking or a 
dedicated lay -by will not require dedicated on -site parking. Where access is from a 
traffic -sensitive street or other major road or where parking is not available wit hout 
obstructing the road, provision shall be made for adequate parking (e.g. in a lay -by) for 
a tanker adjacent to the site. If access is from a public road, the pump station location 
shall be set back from the edge of the road for a distance of one vehic le length, based 
on the largest vehicle accessing the site. The maintenance vehicle shall be capable of 
getting as close as possible to the wet well Chamber. The access provision to and from 
the pumping station shall enable such  access to be achieved witho ut undertaking 
unsafe  vehicle  movements . The access shall also be provided to comply with the most 
up-to-date Local Authority Design Manuals particularly in respect of road curves and 
turning circles.  
 
On-site hardstanding areas shall be surrounded by pre -cast kerb units (255mm x 
125mm  set in a bed and haunch of Grade C25/30 concrete to IS EN 206 ) or slip formed 
concrete kerbing , installed to match the level of the surrounding ground . Such hard -
standing may comprise permeable or impermeable surfaces, depending on the w ater 
service activities being carried out on the site and on the sub -surface ground conditions 
at the site.  
 
Permeable surfaces shall comprise a 500mm depth of compacte d Clause 804 granular 
material, in accordance with the Transport Infrastructure Ireland (formerly National 
Roads Authority) Specification for Road Works, with a 75mm layer of 10mm single sized 
aggregate on a geotextile weed barrier  founded on load bearing subgrade material .  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
105 
 Impermeable surfaces shall comprise a 500mm depth of compacted Clause 804 
granular material , in accordance with the Transport Infrastructure Ireland (formerly 
National Roads Authority) Specification for Road Works with either a concrete or 
macadam finish.  
 
Where vacuum tanker access is provided or where HGV access is required, the hard -
standing shall be designed to carry such vehicles , (including 35/40 tonne ridged or 
articulate vehicle s), and shall comprise a reinforced concrete slab (Grade C 28/35 to IS 
EN 206 - 20mm aggregate  to IS EN 1260 ) on a Clause 804 granular sub -base  founded 
on load bearing subgrade material . For lighter vehicles, a tarmacadam surfaces, 
comprising 75mm wearing course on a 75mm well compacted regulating course shall 
be placed on the Clause 804 granular sub -base , shall be provided.   
 
Where hard standing areas are located over locations that have been excavated for 
const ruction of the wet well, valve chamber, emergency storage tank and other deep 
components, backfill beneath the hardstanding area shall be carried out with 
“acceptable material” as outlined in Clause 601 of the TII “Specification for Roadworks, 
Series 600 – Earthworks”, Table 6/1, Class 6F1 or 6F 2 material  and compacted 
accordingly to ensure that the sub -base is capable to taking the applied loads.   
 
5.8  Hydraulic Design of Pumping Stations        
 
The design flow rate of a pumping station will depend on the Wastewater  flow rate and 
volume arriving to it from the Gravity Sewer  system. Generally, pumping stations are 
designed to limit the number of pump starts so that the pumping plant is not damaged 
by excessive start/stop activity, generally not exceeding 1 0 starts per hour. The 
pumping plant shall be fitted with direct on -line starters for motors sizes up to 5 kW. 
Motors rated 5kW and above shall be provided with s tar delta starters , soft starters  or 
variable speed drives (VSDs). The VSDs shall be installed in separate Form 4 ventilated 
enclosures to manufacturers’ requirements. Adequate cooling and ventilation shall be 
provided in the pump station kiosk to ensure that the VSDs operate within the des ign 
tolerances with regard to ambient temperature within the space.  
 
The pumping duration of a pump unit shall not be less than 60 seconds. The pumping 
capacity shall ensure that the Wastewater  is passed from the wet well and the Rising 
Main  without excessive residence time which might give rise to septic conditions. 
Generally the combined residence time in the wet well and the Rising Main  shall be less 
than six hours. A pumped flow rate shall be chosen to achieve at least a minimum flow 
velocity in the Rising Main , as outlined in Section 3.7  above.  
 
The developer is to provide IW with hydraulic calculations as part of his design 
submission for the proposed pump station , as required in Section 2.3  above .  
 
Generally, pumping plant shall be si zed to deliver a minimum peak flow rate of six (6) 
times the incoming dry weather flow (DWF) but pump delivery of three (3) times the dry 
weather flow (DWF) may be appropriate if adequate balance storage of the Wastewater  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
106 
 is provided. The rate of pumping shall ensure compliance with the rising main velocity 
range outlined in Section 3.7.2  above.  
 
Where there are limitations on the capacity of the downstream Network to accept the 
instantaneous design pumped flows, consideration shall be given to adjusting the 
control philosophy of the pump station to limit the forward flow and, therefore, reduce 
the risk of negative impact on the downstream network. This may include (but is not 
limited to) the provision of on -site balance storage, change to proposed pump model or 
the use of variable speed drives to limit the flow under conditions where the receiving 
sewer capacity is reduced  and the flow is not restricted beyond the six -hour residence 
time, as set out above . Such proposals , including the p roposed control philosophy,  shall 
be provided to Irish Water for review  and assessment .  
 
Balance storage may be required in association with the pumping station to provide a 
minimum 10-hour and up to a maximum 24-hour storage capacity. The required storage 
capacity will depend on the size of the Development . Emergency storage capacity of 
24-hour Dry Weather Flow is required for Development s up to 250 units . The balance 
storage requirement  capacity will  be reduce for larger Development s in accordance with  
the requirements of Section 5.11  or with specific advice from Irish Water’s Connections 
and Developer Services.   
 
The pumping plant shall have 100% standby capacity. The plant shall be configured to 
allow future retrofitting with a tele metry outstation to transfer data from the pumping 
station to an Irish Water control centre  as outlined in Section 5. 26 below.  
 
For pumping stations where phased development is anticipated, the pump station 
structure shall be provided to facilitate the fully developed site. Pipework shall be 
provided for the ultimate flows. This might involve the installation of pipes within the we t 
well and provision within the valve chamber for future pump units which are initially not 
in use. The pumping plant shall be provided to accommodate the likely medium term 
anticipated flow, provided this does not create a nuisance or septicity problem. I n some 
instances, twin Rising Main s may be required to accommodate the phased flow 
increase over the life cycle of the pumping facility. Where pump station expansion is 
proposed for future phased development, the initial Design Submission (See Part 2 
Desig n Requirements and Design Submissions of th is Code of Practice) shall include 
the design calculations for the phasing of the Pumping Station.  
  
The pumping plant shall be designed to pump against a design head comprising a 
combination of the static head and the pipe friction head. The pumping station design 
static head for the design flow shall be based on the difference in level between the 
mid-point of the duty pump s tart level in the wet well and the discharge point at the 
header Manhole . The design pipe friction head will depend on the pipe size, the pipe 
fittings, velocity in the pipe as well as the friction factor of the pipe material. The 
pipework associated with the pumping plant shall be adequately restrained to resist 
vibration and impact arising from the operation of the pumping plant.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
107 
 The pumping station shall be provided with an ultrasonic level control system with 
operator adjustable set points for pump un it cut in and cut out as well as top level cut in 
and low level over -ride cut out. The cut -out level shall be set such that it is above the 
top of the pump motors. Appropriate set points shall be provided if duty and assist 
pumping plant is included in the  pumping station. Duty and standby pumping plant shall 
be provided at each pumping station. A standby pump unit shall be provided if a 
duty/assist pumping arrangement is required. A hard wired high level float switch shall 
be provided in each pumping station and these shall be linked to the telemetry control 
system. Automatic duty/standby switch over shall be incorporated into the pump control 
system. A manual override shall be provided in the pump control system. The pump 
units shall operate safely and effectively in accordance with the pump manufacturer’s 
instructions such that the pump units do not exhibit damaging cavitation, vibration, air 
locking or surface vortices.  
 
5.9  Pumping Plant  
 
Having regard for the provision s of Section 5.8  above in relation to hydraulic design of 
pumping stations and taking cognisance of phased capacity allowance , the s pecific 
minimum requirements for pumping plant are as follows:  
 
5.9.1  Pumping plant shall be of failsafe design . 
5.9.2  All plant and equipment shall be suitably Ex -rated in accordance with the 
Hazardous Area Classification for the pumping station site . 
5.9.3  Pumping plant shall be duty and standby arrangement or duty/assist and 
standby arrangement.  
5.9.4  Pumps shall  be submersible pu mps with automatic decoupling 
arrangements complete with twin guide rails, easy lift, etc..  
5.9.5  Pumping plant shall be of proven track record.   
5.9.6  Automatic selection rotation of the duty/standby or duty/assist/stand -by 
pumps shall be provided on an hours run b asis with manual over -ride.  
5.9.7  Pumps to be sized to pump forward a minimum of six (6) times DWF  (with  a 
minimum of three (3) times DWF , if storage is provided)  provided the 
velocity in the rising main is within the range outlined in Section 3.7.2 
above .   
5.9.8  Pumps shall be suitable for pumping unscreened Wastewater  containing 
fibrous material and large solids . Pumps connected to small diameter Rising 
Main s to be fitted with an anti -blockage/anti -ragging system and additional 
anti blockage requirements will be required for Rising Main s of 80mm 
diameter and less. 
5.9.9  Pumps shall have , in general , a minimum discharge size of  80mm.  
5.9.10  Pump control shall be via ultrasonic level transducers, located above liquid 
level, in an easily accessible location , while not encroaching or impeding 
access.   
5.9.11  The ultrasonic controller shall be suitable for fascia or panel mounting and 
shall incorporate a number of relays (minimum of five) to operate the pump 
units and alarms according to the required control philosophy.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
108 
 5.9.12  The pump guide system shall be provided to allow the pump units to be 
automatically coupled shall the outlet pipework and held in place by its own 
weight.  
5.9.13  The guide system shall allow the pump units to be lifted to the top of the wet 
well with out the need to undo any fixing arrangements or to enter the wet 
well. 
5.9.14  Anchor bolts shall be stainless steel, stainless steel and galvanised steel 
surfaces shall not come into contact with each other.  
5.9.15  Pumps to be mounted on a cast iron coupling/duck -foot p edestal, with 
automatic decoupling arrangements.  
5.9.16  Pump arrangement shall be provided to allow easy installation and speedy 
removal from the sump without need for operator entry to the sump.  
5.9.17  Pumps guide rails shall be of stainless steel (grade 316).  
5.9.18  Pumps shall be provided with certified, stainless steel lifting chain (designed 
to IS EN 818 – Part 7 ), suitably sized and fit for purpose, with 8mm thick 
links, at least, and large links a t not more than 1m intervals.  
5.9.19  All statutory inspections shall be undertaken duri ng the Defects Liability 
Period. I n particular, t he stainless steel chains  are to be subject to 6 month 
inspection , the lifting chain at the end of the Defects Liability Period shall 
have a current valid certification for a further period of  3 months . 
5.9.20  Discharge pipework within the wet well shall be complete with bends, radial 
tee-pieces, fittings, etc. to link the wet well pipework to the valve chamber 
pipework.  
5.9.21  Pipework within the valve chamber shall incorporate isolation valves (one 
per pump installed), non -return valves (one per pump installed), bends, 
radial tee-pieces, etc..  
5.9.22  Non-return valves shall have removable covers, ductile iron body with 
resilient seated disc and stainless steel hinge pin, c omplete with either a 
lever arm and weight.  
5.9.23  Bends shall be swept/slow bends to minimise blockages and pipe friction 
losses.  
5.9.24  Sluice valves shall be provided with removable hand -wheels.  
5.9.25  Flange adaptors shall be provided to permit ease of removal of valves fr om 
the pipework.  
5.9.26  All pipework and valves shall be of ductile iron to IS EN 598, suitable for 
use with sewage , with PN -16 flanges to BS EN 1092 -1, with appropriate 
colour and designation marking . 
5.9.27  Pump motors shall be high efficiency with Class F insulation and IP68 rating  
and must meet IE3 efficiency standards or better . 
5.9.28  Pump efficiency shall be maintained within 15% of its maximum efficiency 
over the whole of the specified duty range . 
5.9.29  Motors shall include stator over -temperature protection in the form of 
thermistors embedded in each phase of the windings, over -temperature 
protection shall automatically re -set when the temperature returns to normal  
and protection from seal leakage shall also be provi ded. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
109 
 5.9.30  Pumps shall have a maximum speed of 1500rpm. Pump characteristics 
shall be stable, non -overloading and shall be such that the pumps shall 
operate as close to maximum efficiency at the design point  (Speeds in 
excess of this may be allowed in the case o f non -clogging macerator 
pumps , where these are provided ). 
5.9.31  Pumps shall be provided with indicator plates providing information for the 
pump, motor, etc. A duplicate stainless steel plate to be provided and 
mounted in the kiosk or control structure . 
5.9.32  Each pump unit shall be supplied and fitted with a cable of suitable length to 
reach the means of termination which shall be either (a) a control kiosk 
MCC gland plate and terminals or (b) an intermediate junction box in the 
valve chamber  or (c) an interme diate junction box housed in an 
intermediate kiosk . 
5.9.33  A spare name plate for the pump shall be fixed to the plywood panel 
support board within the kiosk.   
 
It is the responsibility of the  Plant  Designer to ensure that Area Classification is applied 
to the d esign of the pump station and to identify the potential for flammable or explosive 
atmospheres to develop in or around the pump station. ATEX Directives 1999/92/EC 
and 1994/9/EC are to be adhered to . IS EN 60079 shall also be adhered to  in regard to 
Area C lassification. The drawings submitted and the specification of the pump station  
shall demonstrate the  Area  Classification of the pump station or otherwise the absence 
of zoning.  
 
5.10  Wet Well             
 
The wet -well of the pumping station can be of rectangular or circular plan section with a 
minimum 1,800mm x 2,500mm plan or 1,800mm diameter shape . The shape of the wet 
well shall be such that solid matter does not accumulate in dead spots within the well.  
The shape of the wet well  and its benching as well as the  location of the inlet Sewer  
arrangement shall  ensure satisfactory flow conditions to the pump unit to avoid the 
formation of damaging vortices. This is best achieved by installing the incoming Sewe r 
on the centreline between the submersible pump units at a depth between 0.15m and 
1.15 m above the pump highest cut in level. An inlet baffle shall be provided for the 
Sewer  inlet to prevent excessive aeration of the Wastewater  or the interference with 
ultrasonic beams used for level sensing. There shall be a minimum capacity between 
the start and stop level controls to give a maximum of 1 0 starts per hour.  
 
The depth of the wet well shall be suitable to accommodate the incomin g Gravity 
Sewer , the pumping plant, the minimum pumping storage between cut -in and cut -out, 
etc. The maximum depth of the wet well shall be 6.0m below ground level. Wet wells of 
depth greater than 6.0m shall require specific approval of Irish Water  and wil l require 
the submission of a specific detailed design for review .   
 
An inlet collection Manhole  shall be provided just upstream of the pump station wet well 
in all situations. Where there are multiple Sewer s draining to the pumping station site , IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
110 
 the inlet collection Manhole  will combine flow to the wet well in a single inlet pipe. 
Provision shall be made for isolating the incoming flow by means of a hand -operated 
valve o r penstock. This unit shall be located in the inlet collection Manhole upstream of  
the wet well and not in the wet well itself.  
 
If off-line emergency storage is provided for the wet well, a high -level overflow, 
completed with a stainless steel baffle to prevent floating solids entering the emergency 
storage tank , shall be provided . A return flow pipe shall be provided, complete with a 
flap valve, between the emergency storage tank and the wet well to return stored flows.  
The overflow and return pipework is detailed in Section 5.11  below.     
 
Benching in the wet well shall be provided to eliminate “dead zones” within the wet well 
to prevent siltation or accumulation of debris. The benching shall start no more than 
100mm from the pump unit volute or in accordance with the pump manufacturer’s 
recommendations. The slope of the  benching shall be a minimum of 45 degrees. The 
area under the pump shall be as small as possible to ensure well cleansing and the flat 
floor area shall be kept to a minimum. The wet well shall be kept to a minimum to 
reduce the amount of benching that is required.   
 
The wet well shall be designed, as far as practicable, to eliminate the need for man -
entry for maintenance. No permanent ladder or step irons shall be located within the wet 
well.  If the wet well is deeper  than 4m , Irish Water may require add itional safety 
measures to be installed within the well for maintenance purposes.  
 
The wet well shall be constructed using in -situ reinforced concrete , Grade C30/37  to IS 
EN 206 , or with pre -cast concrete units. The wet well shall be water tight for both 
ingress of groundwater and egress of Wastewater . The minimum factor of safety 
against flotation for the empty structure subject to groundwater pressure shall be 1. 2. 
This shall only be used where the maximum groundwater level is accurately known or, if 
not reliably known, a groundwater level equivalent to the finished ground level shall be 
used. The developer shall submit site specific anti -floatation calculations and measures 
proposed in respect of pump station structures (cast in -situ or pre -cast concrete) , as 
required in Section 2.3.28 .  
 
If constructed with in -situ reinforced concrete, t he wet well structure shall be designed to 
IS EN 1992 – Part 3 , Design of Concrete Structures  - Part 3: (Liquid retaining and 
containment structures, Tightness Class 2) . The surface finish of the internal surface of 
the wet well shall be fair faced finish  (F2 or better) obtained using forms to provide a 
hard surface with true, clean edges . Only mi nor surface blemishes are permitted. Fins 
and other projections shall be removed and the surface made good. The cover slab 
shall be designed to withstand accidental vehicular wheel loads. Reinforcement used in 
the wet well structure shall be high yield ste el in accordance with BS EN 4449.  
 
If precast concrete units  are used  for wet well construction , they  shall conform to IS EN 
1917  and IS 420 . Joints between the precast components shall provide equivalent water 
resistance as required in IS EN 1992 – Part 3 . The precast units shall be surrounded IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
111 
 with at lease a 150mm thickness of C30/37 to IS EN 206 , 20mm aggregate size  to IS 
EN 12620 . This composite structure shall be designed to IS EN 1992 – Part 3,  Design of 
Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining  and containment structures, Tightness 
Class 2).   
 
The use of alternative pre-cast concrete system units may be allowed, subject to Irish 
Water review, provided that they are deigned to IS EN 1992 – Part 3,  Design of 
Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining and containment structures, Tightness 
Class 2). These structures shall be partially or fully surrounded in concrete at lease a 
150mm thickness of C20/25 to IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size to IS EN 12 620, where 
required for sealing joints and pipe connection  locations unless otherwise agreed with 
Irish Water.  These tanks shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
requirements  subject to adherence to good site practice.   
 
The pipe manufa cturer’s recommendations shall be followed where a Rising Main  
passes through the wall of a wet well to safeguard against the integrity of the main from 
differential settlement or movement. If pipes through the wall are installed in box -out 
openings, subsequent filling of the opening shall be carried out with grade C25/35 to IS 
EN 206 , 20mm aggregate size  to IS EN 12620 , concrete to ensure a completely 
watertight structure.  The pipe shall be fitted with puddle flanges as they pass through 
the wall. The Developer shall provide details in all instances of the sealing me thodology 
where the process pipework passes through the wall of a chamber either where the 
intention is to cast in process pipework after installation or where it is proposed to 
integrate same in pre -cast units.  
 
The building in of pipes through walls, ro ofs and other concrete structures shall be 
carried out to prevent liquid leakage into or out of the structure. Puddle flanges shall be 
provided to prevent such leakage and to ensure watertight construction. Where 
necessary, thrust flanges shall be provided  to resist imbalanced forces acting on the 
pipe.   
 
The pump station wet well shall be provided with pipework, 80 mm minimum diameter , 
terminating 100mm from the low side of the sump floor and extending through the wall 
of the valve chamber . Pipework sizes below 80mm diameter may be allowed in small 
capacity pumping station installations with the written approval of Irish Water. This pipe 
system shall be fitted within the valve chamber with a non -return valve and male Bauer 
coupling in the val ve chamber, to allow emptying of the Rising Main  by a vacuum 
tanker.   
 
Backfill around the wet well shall be placed so that a 500mm width of Clause 808 
material, compacted in 300mm layers , is provided to ensure adequate support beneath 
any structures or s tructural surrounds. Free draining granular material, 500mm wide, 
shall be provided round the wet well close to ground level of the unit.  
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
112 
 5.11  Emergency Storage  
 
Unless specified by Irish Water, an emergency overflow  to a watercourse or Storm 
Sewer is not to be provided for Wastewater  pumping stations. Emergency storage is 
required at each pump station by the provision of a  larger wet well, a single separate 
specifically designed off-line storage tank or an enlarged Sewer  shall be provided in 
order to provide additional storage and thereby reduce the risk of localised flooding or 
pollution during plant or power failure. If the storage is provided within the wet well, t he 
storage capacity shall be accommodated above the high est cut in level p ump setting 
and below the invert of the incoming connected inlet Sewer . If part of the incoming 
Sewer  is used for a portion of the storage, it shall be limited to ensure that surcharging 
of the collection system does not impact any existing or possible fut ure connections. 
The plan area of the wet well below the high level alarm pump setting shall not be 
increased to form any of the required storage.  
 
The minimum factor of safety against floatation for the empty emergency storage 
structure subjected to grou ndwater upward pressure shall be 1.2. This shall only be 
used where the maximum groundwater level is accurately known, or, if not reliably 
known, a groundwater level equivalent to the finished ground level shall be used. The 
developer shall submit site spe cific anti -floatation calculations and measures proposed 
in respect of pump station structures (cast in -situ or pre -cast concrete), as required in 
Section 2.3.28 . 
 
Emergency st orage capacity, based on dry weather flow, shall be provided at the 
pumping station. The required storage capacity will depend on the size of the 
Development . Emergency storage capacity of 24-hour Dry Weather Flow will be 
required for Development s up to 2 50 units. The emergency storage capacity 
requirement will be reduced to 18, 12 and 10 hours on a steppe d approach for larger 
Development s in accordance with the Table below or specific advice from Irish Water’s 
Connections and Developer Services.  
 
Houses  Storage Hours  Max Storage 
Volume (m3) 
0 – 250 24 112 
250 - 333 24 for 250 and 18 thereafter  139 
334 - 1667  24 for 250, 18  up to 333 and 12 thereafter  437 
1668 - 3333  24 for 250, 18 up to 333, 12 up to 1667 and 10 thereafter  746 
 
A minimum 225mm diameter high-level overflow pipe , complete with stainless steel 
baffle, as referred to above in Section 5.10 , or a pipe to match the capacity of the 
incoming Sewer , whichever is larger, shall be provided between the pump station wet 
well and the stor age chamber if off line storage is provided. The return pipe feeding 
back  to the pump station shall be of a similar diameter and shall be fitted with a 
proprietary non -return valve at the wet well chamber. Rocker pi pes and joints shall be 
provided in the d uctile iron overflow and return pipes.    
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
113 
 In exceptional circumstances, if an emergency overflow is to be provided, the following 
legislative or written consents will at least be required . Consent to discharge from the 
Environmental Protection Agency,  
5.11.1  Consent from the appropriate Local Authority to place an outfall in a 
watercourse  in accordance with the Water Pollution Act ,  
5.11.2  Planning Permission fr om the relevant Planning Authority,  
5.11.3  Easement  and right to discharge from affected land owners  
5.11.4  Consent from  Inland Fisheries Ireland  and/or Waterways Ireland , if relevant,  
5.11.5  A Foreshore Licence if the discharge is to a foreshore area.    
       
The Developer shall provide the requisite consents from the relevant regulatory 
authorities (Local Authority, EPA), upfro nt in the Design Submission documentation.  
 
In the exceptional situations w here emergency overflows to water bodies are allowed 
and installed, the overflow pipe or weir shall be fitted with mec hanical self -cleaning 
screens and baffle plates to retain floating materi al, debris, etc. within the collection 
Network  for subsequent forward pumping. The aperture size of the overflow screen will 
depend on the receiving water body and it shall comply with the requirements of the 
document available f rom the Envi ronmental Protection Agency, Urban Wastewater 
Treatment Directive (91/271/EEC), Procedures and Criteria in relation to storm water 
overflows, as published by the Department of Environment  (1993)  and any other 
legislative requirements .  
 
The single s torage tank shall be constructed using in -situ reinforced concrete, Grade 
C30/37 to IS EN 206, or with pre -cast concrete units. The storage tank  shall be water 
tight for both ingress of groundwater and egress of Wastewater. The minimum factor of 
safety aga inst flotation for the empty structure subject to groundwater pressure shall be 
1.2. This shall only be used where the maximum groundwater level is accurately known 
or, if not reliably known, a groundwater level equivalent to the finished ground level shall 
be used.   
 
If constructed with in -situ reinforced concrete, the storage tank shall be designed to IS 
EN 1992 – Part 3  Design of Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining and 
containment structures, Tightness Class 2).  The surface finish of the int ernal surface of 
the wet well  shall be fair faced finish (F2 or better) obtained using forms to provide a 
hard surface with true, clean edges. Only minor surface blemishes are permitted. Fins 
and other projections shall be removed and the surface made good . The cover slab 
shall be designed to withstand accidental vehicular wheel loads. Reinforcement used in 
the storage tank  structure shall be high yield steel in accordance with BS EN 4449.  
 
If a precast concrete unit is used for the storage tank constructio n, it shall be designed 
to IS EN 1992 – Part 3 Design of Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining and 
containment structures, Tightness Class 2). as liquid retaining structures . Joints between 
the precast components shall be fully sealed to prevent i ngress of ground water and 
egress of the storage tank contents and shall provide equivalent water resistance as 
required in IS EN 1992 – Part 3  Design of Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
114 
 and containment structures, Tightness Class 2). These structures shall be partially or 
fully surrounded in concrete at lease a 150mm thickness of C20/25 to IS EN 206, 20mm 
aggregate size to IS EN 12620, where required for sealing joints and pipe connection  
locations unless otherwise agreed with Irish Water.  These tanks shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements subject to adherence to good site 
practice.   
  
The pipe manufacturer’s recommendations shall be followed where pipes pass through 
the wall of the emergency storage tank to safeguard against the integrity of the main 
from differential settlement or movement. If pipes through the wall are installed in box -
out openings, subsequent filling of the opening shall be carried out with grade C 30/35 to 
IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate size to IS EN 12620, concrete to ensure a completely 
watertight structure. The Developer shall provide details in all instances of the sealing 
methodology where the process pipework passes through the wall of a chamber either 
where the intention is to cast in proc ess pipework after installation or where it is 
proposed to integrate same in pre -cast units.  
 
The building in of pipes through walls, roofs and other concrete structures shall be 
carried out to prevent liquid leakage into or out of the structure. Puddle fl anges shall be 
provided to prevent such leakage and to ensure watertight construction. Where 
necessary, thrust flanges shall be provided to resist imbalanced forces acting on the 
pipe.  
 
Backfill around the wet well shall be placed so that a 500mm width of  Clause 808 
material, compacted in 300mm layers, is provided to ensure adequate support beneath 
any structures or structural surrounds. Free draining granular material, 500mm wide, 
shall be provided round the wet well close to ground level of the unit.  
 
5.12  Valve Chamber  
 
The valve chamber is provided to house valves and fittings associated with the pumping 
plant. It shall be separate from the wet well but it may be structurally attached to the wet 
well. The valve chamber shall be fully sealed from the we t well and it shall be provided 
with a manually operated Drain  valve to allow the discharge of liquid from the valve 
chamber to the wet well. The size of the valve chamber shall be adequate to house all 
equipment an d provide adequate space for maintenance,  plant replacement, etc.  The 
valve chamber shall house the following:  
 
5.12.1  Discharge pipework complete with radial bends , radial tee pieces , valves, 
fittings, etc. to link the wet well pipework to the Rising Main  pipe.    
5.12.2  A gate valve for each pump unit mounted horizontally in the pump outlet 
pipework and arranged to isolate the pump unit from the Rising Main .  
5.12.3  A non -return valve for each pump unit mounted horizontally in the pump 
outlet pipework, upstream (wet well side) of the gate valve, and arranged 
to prevent flow reversal under normal operating conditions in the Rising 
Main . IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
115 
 5.12.4  A gate valve and 100mm  male Bauer coupling mounted vertically on a tee 
piece in the Rising Main ,  upstream of the Rising Main  gate valve and 
chec k valve for pumping out of the Rising Main . 
 
The valve chamber shall be provided with a hand operated valve and gravity drain into 
the wet well. The valve shall be installed in a drain sump at the corner of the valve 
chamber  floor area . The floor of the valve chamber shall slope to the sump to enable 
collection of any accumulated liquid in the valve chamber. The discharge drain shall be 
protected to ensure that flows of noxious gas cannot enter the valve chamber fr om the 
wet well.   
 
The valve chamber shall have a maximum depth of 1.5m from soffit of the roof slab to 
the floor of the chamber. Appropriately  sized covers shall be provided to the openings in  
the roof slab of the chamber. Adequate clearance shall be provided beneath all 
pipework to allow safe access to flange bolts for maintenance operations to be carried 
out.  
 
The valve chamber shall be constructed using in -situ reinforced concrete, Grade C30/37 
to IS EN 206, or with pre -cast concrete units. The chamber shall be water tight for both 
ingress of groundwater and egress of Wastewater . The minimum factor of safety 
against flotation for the empty structure subject to groundwater pressure shall be 1.2. 
This shall only be used where the maximum groundwater level is accurately known or, if 
not reliably known, a groundwater level equivalent to the finished ground level shall be 
used.  The developer shall submit site specific anti -floatation calculations and measures 
proposed in respect of pump station structures (cast in -situ or pre -cast concrete), as 
required in Section 2.3.28 . . 
 
If constructed with in -situ reinforced conc rete, the valve chamber structure shall be 
designed to IS EN 1992 – Part 3  Design of Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid 
retaining and containment structures, Tightness Class 2).  The surface finish of the 
internal surface of the chamber shall be fair fac ed finish (F2 or better) obtained using 
forms to provide a hard surface with true, clean edges. Only minor surface blemishes 
are permitted. Fins and other projections shall be removed and the surface made good. 
The cover slab shall be designed to withstand  accidental vehicular wheel loads. 
Reinforcement used in the valve chamber structure shall be high yield steel in 
accordance with BS EN 4449.  
 
If precast concrete units are used for valve chamber construction, they shall conform to 
IS EN 1917. Joints betwe en the precast components shall provide equivalent water 
resistance as required in IS EN 1992 – Part 3 . The precast units shall be surrounded 
with not less than 150mm thickness of Grade C20/25 to IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate 
size to IS EN 12620.  This composit e structure shall be designed to IS EN 1992 – Part 3,  
Design of Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining and containment structures, 
Tightness Class 2).  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
116 
 The use of other pre -cast concrete units may be allowed, subject to Irish Water review, 
provided that they are deigned to IS EN 1992 – Part 3,  Design of Concrete Structures - 
Part 3: (Liquid retaining and containment structures, Tightness Class 2). These tanks 
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements subject to 
adherence to good site practice.   
 
The chamber shall be fitted with Manhole  steps to comply with IS EN 13101, Type D, 
Class 1, galvanised mild steel and plastic encapsulated. Access to the confined space 
within the chamber shall be by way of a safe access p lan.   
 
The pipe manufacturer’s recommendations shall be followed where pipes pass through 
the wall of the valve chamber to safeguard against the integrity of the main from 
differential settlement or movement. If pipes through the wall are installed in box -out 
openings, subsequent filling of the opening shall be carried out with grade C30/35 to IS 
EN 206, 20mm aggregate size to IS EN 12620, concrete to ensure a completely 
watertight structure. The Developer shall provide details in all instances of the seal ing 
methodology where the process pipework passes through the wall of a chamber either 
where the intention is to cast in process pipework after installation or where it is 
proposed to integrate same in pre -cast units.  
 
The building in of pipes through wall s, roofs and other concrete structures shall be 
carried out to prevent liquid leakage into or out of the structure. Puddle flanges shall be 
provided to prevent such leakage and to ensure watertight construction. Where 
necessary, thrust flanges shall be pro vided to resist imbalanced forces acting on the 
pipe.   
 
Backfill around the wet well shall be placed so that a 500mm width of Clause 808 
material, compacted in 300mm layers, is provided to ensure adequate support beneath 
any structures or structural surro unds. Free draining granular material, 500mm wide, 
shall be provided round the wet well close to ground level of the unit.    
 
Cable ducts into the valve chamber and between the valve chamber and the wet well 
shall be sealed watertight. Gas tight sealing g lands shall be provided between the valve 
chamber and the wet well and the valve chamber and the kiosk to prevent the migration 
of gas into the valve chamber and between the wet well and the control kiosk.   
 
5.13  Flow Metering   
 
Flow meters shall be provided to measure and record the Wastewater  flow being 
pumped forward  through the Rising Main . Magnetic flow meters , to IP68,  shall be 
provided complete with a digital display showing instantaneous and accumulated flow 
records. A “no -flow” protection facility shall be provided for the pumps. Flow meter and 
associated equipment, including calibration test certification, will be required for all 
pumping stations. The controller for the magnetic flowmeter shall be mounted  in the 
kiosk .  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
117 
 The flow meter shall be provided in a separate flow meter chamber, located a sufficient 
distance from all fittings and bends, to ensure that interference of the measurement 
does not arise from flow turbulence associated with such fittings.  
 
The flow mete r chamber shall have minimum plan dimensions of 1500mm x 1500mm . It 
shall include a flow meter, positioned in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions . Sluice valve s shall be provided adjacent to the meter chamber and valve 
chamber to allow isolation,  removal or servicing of the meter.  The valve shall be 
provided after the flowmeter at least a separation distance equivalent to that 
recommended by the flowmeter manufacture. The pipework within the meter chamber 
shall incorporate a dismantling joint to allow removal of the flow meter .    
 
5.14  Access to the Wet Wells, Valve Chambers and Other Chambers    
 
The top of the wet well, valve chamber, meter chamber and other associated chambers 
shall be situated flush with the surrounding paved areas. Where the intention is to use a 
pre-cast concrete cover slab, The Developers shall in those instances provided details 
or the proposed cover to the pre -cast concrete manufacturer in advance to ensure that 
the cover units fit the openings and are flush with  the surface of the finished roof slab. 
The Developer shall also bear in mind that pump station installations are to be designed 
to prevent inundation.  
 
Access covers in the roofs of the wet well, valve chamber and other chambers shall be 
flush with the r oof slab and large enough to allow for pump units, valves and flow 
meters to be removed easily and safely out of the well/chamber for above ground 
inspection, maintenance, etc. Openings in all other chambers shall not be smaller than 
675mm x 6 75mm.    
 
The opening and access covers for the wet well  and valve chamber  shall have the 
following features:  
 
5.14.1  Covers to be secure and capable of providing safe and easy access to the 
chambers for inspection, maintenance and operation.  
5.14.2  Covers to be fabricated from Durbar plate , minimum 4mm thick , 
galvanised to IS EN 1461 (2009)  (minimum zinc coating of 70 microns)  
with non -slip surface and finished flush with the roof slab of the 
chamber (higher specification material or finishes may be required in 
aggressive enviro nments, e.g. coastal sites) . 
5.14.3  Hinged covers shall be provided as a minimum for single, twin and triple 
leaf covers.  
5.14.4  A factory fitted seal shall be provided between the cover and frame for wet 
well and overflow chamber covers  and each leaf shall also be fit ted with 
and odour control seal . 
5.14.5  The minimum allowable access for wet wells and valve chambers to be 
1,400mm x 800mm, access openings to Manhole s and other infrequent 
access chambers may be 6 75mm x 6 75mm.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
118 
 5.14.6  Chamber access covers with a clear opening exceeding 1000mm shall 
conform to BS 9124 . 
5.14.7  Hinged covers to be used in all openings exceeding 6 75mm x 6 75mm.  
5.14.8  Hinged cover to incorporate a recessed facility for securing of the cover 
with an  approved padlock.  
5.14.9  Covers to be lockable to LPS1175, SR2 using high security locks.  
5.14.10  The padlock facility shall have a cover plate which shall automatically fall 
flush with the surrounding cover lid.  
5.14.11  Each cover leaf shall incorporate an auto -locking safety stay.   
5.14.12  Each leaf o f the cover to have torsion spring assistance to ensure a lifting 
effort of less than 25kgF . 
5.14.13  The location of the hinges and the lift assistance  sets shall not impinge on 
the safe entry to the chamber.  
5.14.14  For pumping stations wet wells  and valve chambers , a hinged , safety , fall 
protection grid in two sections to be provided below the cover and to be 
capab le of withstanding a 250kg load over the total area of the grid . The 
lifting effort of the grid shall not exceed 25kgF. When lifted, the grid  shall 
be capable of being  secure d in the upright position.  
5.14.15  In a closed position, the cover s shall be capable of withstanding a 6 tonne 
static wheel load , as a minimum . Where there is a risk of traffic loading on 
the cover, it shall be capable of withstanding such loadings as a minimum.  
5.14.16  Provision to be made within the wet well covers and frames to allow the 
main cover to be closed while the pump unit and any associated cables 
are removed.  
5.14.17  Closure of the wet well cover to be possible with the pump unit at a 
minimum height abo ve the frame to provide a safe working platform for 
maintenance , if so desired .  
5.14.18  For large openings, segmental multi cover units shall be provided.  
5.14.19  Beams for supporting segmental multi unit assemblies, including 
associated brackets, to be of steel and post  galvanised to IS EN 1461 
(minimum zinc coating of 70 microns). These beams must not obstruct 
access or be easily removed.  
 
Covers to meter chambers and other Manhole  chambers on the pump station site shall 
comply with Section 3.12  above , and shall be sealed if the site is located in an area 
which might be prone to flooding.  
 
Access to meter chamber , the valve chamber  and other chambers (excluding the wet 
well and the emergency storage tank ) shall be by Manhole  proprietary rungs built into 
the walls. They shall comply with the requirements of IS EN 13101 (2002 ), Type D, 
Class 1. Galvanised mild steel step rungs, 20mm diameter, shall be provided with 
plastic encapsulated finish.  Steps shall be 300mm wide and located 230mm apart 
vertically. The vertical distance between the top of the chamber cover and the first step 
in the chamber shall not exceed 675mm. All step irons shall be centred under the 
access opening in the Manhole  roof slab. A lternatively, galvanised mild steel ladders IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
119 
 may be provided,  in accordance with Section 3.12  above, subject to the requirements 
of Irish Water  or where the depth of the chamber exceeds 3m .  
 
5.15  Venting of Wet Well and Chambers         
 
The selection of the method of venting of the wet well shall t ake into account the risk of 
toxic fumes, dangerous  gasses, odour nuisance , etc. Generally, the wet well and the 
emergency storage tank shall be vented via a duct extending from the ‘high points’ of 
the wet well and connected to free -standing vent columns or vent stacks . In odour 
sensitive areas, passive  activated carbon filters shall be provided to vent 
column (s)/stack (s). The activated carbon filters shall be of robust proprietary 
manufacture and sized to have a minimum retention time of 3 seconds at maxi mum 
flow-rate. Where mechanical ventilation is deemed necessary, it shall be of robust 
design and all control equipment shall be housed in a separate panel within the control 
kiosk.  
 
5.16 General Electrical Requirements  
 
Suitably rated electrical and plant control equipment shall be provided at the pumping 
station to ensure efficient and continuous operation of all plant and equipment. The 
plant  telemetry equipment and installation shall be provided in accordance with Section 
5.26 and Section 5.27  below. The electrical and control plant and equipment for the 
pumping station shall be located in a kiosk or structure within the pumping station site. 
The kiosk(s), including the electrical/control panels, shall be located at least 2m remote 
from the pumping plant.  
 
The incoming electricity supply to the pumping station shall be 400 V, 3 -phase and 
neutral, 4 -wire, 50 Hz, with phase failure protection fitted to the incomer phases to 
prevent motor burnout due to phase failure. All electrical work associated wit h pumping 
station shall be carried out to IEE Regulations. The electrical installation work shall be 
carried out by a Contractor who is included in an approved Register for Electrical 
Contractors (e.g. RECI, IREC, etc.) and will carry out the works in acco rdance with this 
Part 5, which is generally in line with Irish Water’s  WIMES Electrical Specification.  
 
The Developer/Developers Electrical Contractor is responsible to apply to ESB 
Networks for a dedicated and metered power supply and this shall be provided to the 
pump station serving only the pump station plant and associated equipment.  The 
Developers Electrical Contractor must comply with requirements of ESB  Networks and 
shall s eek approval from ESB Networks for starter arrangement’s (Star/Delta).  
 
On completion of the electrical installation, the developer shall provide I rish Water with 
an electrical installation certificate, a signed declaration that the pumping station 
operates in accordance with the schematic diagrams and the required control 
philosophy .  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
120 
 A separate distribution board for building services shall be provided for an electrical 
heater, light  and a  220V , 16amp,  electrical weatherproof socket. Lightening protection 
shall also be provided.  
 
5.17 Cables  
 
Submersible p ump power cables  shall be multicore, flexible cord, vulcanised rubber 
insulated with tough rubber sheath and outer PCP sheath. All metal equipment at the 
pumping station (pump guide rails, covers, etc.) shall be bonded to earth, via earth rods 
located in inspection pits w ith removable covers, remote from the wet well location.  The 
power cables shall comply with the following requirements:  
 
5.17.1  Single core cables  shall have a minimum CSA of 0.75 mm2 
5.17.2  Analogue signal cabling shall comprise screened cables (individually 
and/or collectively screened) and/or twisted pairs  
5.17.3  Neutral conductors shall have the same CSA as their associated line 
conductors  
5.17.4  Wires shall enter and leave an enclosure via a terminal rail and shall not 
be joined between terminals. Permanently -fixed insulating bushes shall be 
provided where wiring passes through internal plates or partitions  
5.17.5  Cables shall run to enclosure doors in spirally -wrapped protection or 
similar.  
5.17.6  Different categories of cabling and wiring shall be installed so as to 
prevent interference w ith each other.  
 
The following requirements shall also apply as a minimum:  
 
5.17.7  Cabling and wiring associated with intrinsically -safe circuits (IS) shall be 
segregated from other circuits in accordance with BS EN 60079 -14. IS 
circuit trunking shall be appropr iately labelled with no other circuits 
enclosed within it. and  
5.17.8  If lightning and/or surge protection measures have been used to protect 
individual circuits, these circuits shall be segregated from the wiring of 
other unprotected circuits.  
5.17.9  The colours of ca bles shall comply with the Table below.  
 
Colour Code  for Wiring  
 
Function  Colour  
Protective  conductor  Green  and Yellow  
Current  transformer  (CT) circuits  White  
Power  Circuits  
Phase  of a single  phase  circuit  Brown(4) 
Phase  1 of a three -phase  AC circuit  Brown(3) 
Phase  2 of a three -phase  AC circuit  Black(3) IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
121 
 Phase  3 of a three -phase  AC circuit  Grey(3) 
Neutral  of a single - or three -phase  circuit  Blue 
Control  Circuits  
110 V ac Red 
24 V ac Yellow  
24 V dc Yellow  
Negative Voltage  Blue 
Inter-compartment,  unsheathed  As per voltage  
Inter-compartment,  sheathed  Grey  sheath,  White  cores  
Signal  Circuits  
Volt free, known  voltage  As Per voltage  
Volt free, unknown  voltage  Red 
Telemetry  digital  signals  (single  cores)  Pink(1) 
Telemetry  digital  signals  (multicore  RTU-MCC)  White  
Analogue  4-20 mA/1 -5 V DC 
Single  cores  (multi  drop applications  only) As per voltage(2) 
Analogue  4-20 mA/1 -5 V DC 
Screened  (all standard  applications  including  
telemetry)  +ve – White(5) 
-ve – Blue(5) 
Intrinsically -safe Light Blue  
Colour  Code notes  to Table:  
(1) Signal  and voltage/current  and source/sink  cabling  
(2) For example, 24  V applications  will have  Yellow(+)  and Blue( -) 
(3) Brown  may be used  for all three  phases,  identified  L1, L2 and L3 at each  end of the 
conductor  and at intervals  along  its length  
(4) If there  is more  than one type of single  phase  wiring  present  within  the electrical  assembly,  
the wiring  shall be phase  coloured  
(5) For example,  for cables  to PAS 5308 -2/BS  EN 50288 -7, a single  pair is coloured  White/Blue  
 
5.18 Cable I nstallation  
 
5.18.1  General   
 
Pump cables shall have sufficient slack and shall be tidily wound and secured to a 
stainless steel hook or bracket under the pump sump cover where they can be easily 
accessed and will not interfere wi th the lifting of the pump or become weighed down 
with debris or rags.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
122 
 Where the kiosk/structure housing the control equipment and wet well are located a 
convenient distance apart the cabling shall be wired directly from the wet well to the 
kiosk/structur e control panel.  
 
All cables shall be installed using a proprietary cable support system and installed in 
accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. Cable tray shall be fabricated 
from heavy duty PVC, GRP, heavy duty hot dipped galvanised steel or from stainless 
steel. Choice shall be made with regard to weight and number of cables.  Only heavy 
duty PVC cable tray will be permitted within wet wells.  
 
Cable junction boxes shall not be installed internal within wet wells irrespective of their 
hazardou s area zoning. If junction boxes are to be installed for cabling between the wet 
well and kiosk/structure housing the control panel, they shall be installed in either (a) an 
intermediate junction box in the valve chamber or (b) an intermediate junction box  
housed in an intermediate kiosk, manufactured with galvanised mild steel or stainless 
steel (grade 316L) or other approved material subject to the site environment.   
  
Joints shall not be permitted in individual power and control cables, except at junction 
boxes.  
 
5.18.2  Glanding  
 
Cable glands shall be suitable for the type of cable being installed and its intended 
operating environment. Cable gland selection shall, as a minimum, consider the 
following performance requirements:  
5.18.2.10  mechanical properties,  
5.18.2.11  electrical properties. and  
5.18.2.12  resistance to external influences.  
 
The minimum degree of ingress protection shall be IP66  
 
Where a cable gland is through a painted or otherwise coated metallic surface, 
provision shall be made to ensure earth continuity betw een the gland and the enclosure.  
 
5.18.3  Termination  
 
Wiring shall be terminated using crimped connectors or lugs, both of which shall be 
suitable for the conductor and the type of termination, as recommended by the 
manufacturer. For screened signal cables, scree ns shall be connected to earth using a 
proprietary 360° connection.  
 
5.18.4 Junction Boxes  
 
Junction boxes shall be designed for bottom cable entry. Junction boxes shall be sized 
so that there is adequate space between the point of cable entry and the term inals, 
such that cable cores may be spread, loomed, identified, terminated and subsequently IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
123 
 removed for testing, without experiencing excessive bending or stress. Junction boxes 
shall be provided with an adequate means of earthing. Terminals shall be clipp ed to 
rails fixed to the back of the junction box or supported off brackets integral with the 
junction box. When a junction box is open, the degree of ingress protection to any live 
part, or to any part that could be energised at above low voltage during a ny test 
procedure, shall be a minimum of IP2X.  
 
5.18.5   Identification of Wiring  
 
All cabling and wiring shall be identified at both ends by interlocking ferrules  or 
approved Irish Water method . All spare cores shall be identified. The colour code for 
wiring shall be in accordance with WIMES. The following requirements shall apply:  
 
 No more than two conductors shall be connected to one side of a terminal.  
 Spare cores shall be terminated at both  ends.  
 Terminals shall be safely and easily accessible after all wiring has been installed 
and terminated.  
 Terminals shall be grouped together and segregated according to operating 
voltage and function by terminal rail mounted barriers.  
 Terminals used for the connection of intrinsically -safe circuits shall be coloured 
blue and be physically separated from other terminal groups by a minimum 
distance of 50 mm.  These terminals shall have a clear shrouded cover and be 
fitted with an appropriate warning label.  
 Unless otherwise specified by the instrument manufacturer, all instrument cable 
screens shall be tied back and insulated from earth at the instrument end of the 
cable, and at the control panel end of the instrument cable the screens shall be 
connected to th e instrument earth bar, i.e., one common star point.  
 After installation of cables, all ducts shall be sealed with an approved proprietary 
sealant. Where the seal is providing a barrier between hazardous and non -
hazardous areas, a transit plate arrangement or other approved proprietary 
sealing arrangement shall be installed, tested and certified as DSEAR compliant.  
 
5.19 Control Panels General Requirements  
 
The pump control panel for pump plant exceeding 7.5 KW shall be Form 4 Type 
manufactured and fabricated to IEE Regulations. Otherwise, the pump panel shall be 
Form 2 or better.  
 
The control panel shall have provision for connection of an external standby generator. 
The power supplier shall be notified o f this installation to allow for an  isolation or ‘kill’ 
switch.  
 
When the control panel is isolated and open, the degree of ingress protection (IP rating) 
of any remaining live part, or of any part which could be energised at above extra -low 
voltage durin g any test procedure, shall be a minimum of IP2X.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
124 
 Suitably -rated protection devices shall be provided at all points necessary for the 
protection and isolation of power and control circuits, and to minimise disruption to the 
overall system on the failure o f a component part of the system  
 
Compartments that contain both extra -low and low -voltage systems shall be arranged 
so that systems of differing voltages are physically segregated from each other  
 
When the control panel is isolated and open, the degree of  ingress protection (IP rating) 
of any remaining live part, or of any part which could be energised at above extra -low 
voltage during any test procedure, shall be a minimum of IP2X.  
 
The electrical assembly shall be designed for bottom entry of the pump ca bles.  LED 
Indicator lamps, Filament lamps shall not be used  
 
All control panel s shall incorporate, at a minimum, the following:  
 
 Generator incomer section complete with generator changeover switch       
interlocked with mains  supply incomer isolation switch.  
 A hand/off/reverse selector for each pump, subject to manufacturers approval.  
 A “Pump Unit Start” push button.  
 A “Pump Unit Stop” push button.  
 Ammeter and hours run meter for each pump.  
 Run light and trip lights for each pump (one for temperature  and one for seal 
failure).  
 Reset button for each pump.  
 Duty/ Standby  or Duty/Assist/Standby selector for each set of pumps.  
 Lockable mains incomer isolator.  
 Lockable door interlock isolators for all starter sections.  
 A sump level indicator for recording the Was tewater surface level in the pum p 
sump on a separate wall mounted unit within the kiosk.  
 Flow Indication – both instantaneous and totalised  either on a separate wall 
mounted unit within the kiosk.  
 Volt free contacts, as outlined in Section 5.24, for  future retrofitting of a telemetry 
system.  
 
The IP rating of the electrical assembly shall be IP54. This IP rating shall apply to the 
complete assembly including all components mounted on the assembly.  
 
The control panel shall have provision for connect ion of an external standby generator. 
The connection for a mobile generator provided on the incoming section of the electrical 
assembly shall be a 125 A, 5 -pole (L1, L2, L3 + N + E), male appliance inlet to BS EN 
60309. A removable link shall be provided t o disconnect the pumping station from the 
DNO's main earth terminal (MET), in the event that a mobile generator is connected to 
the pumping station.  A stud terminal shall also be provided in the kiosk for connection of 
the mobile generator star point to th e earth electrode. A label shall be fixed adjacent to IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
125 
 the stud terminal stating "Bolted Earth Connection shall be made before Generator Is 
Connected with Main Plug And Socket".  
 
5.20 Form 4 Control Panel Compartments  – Additional Requirements  
 
Each compartment of a Form 4 control panel shall include an earth stud, connected to 
the earth bar or main earth stud by a separate protective conductor. Protective 
conductors shall be sized to withstand the fault level, s ubject to a minimum CSA of 6 
mm2. 
 
Each  compartment shall have protective conductors, with a minimum CSA of 2.5 mm2, 
or braided straps of the appropriate CSA for earthing and EMC requirements, taken 
from the compartment earth stud to the compartment door, the component mounting 
plates and earth  terminals, the equipment mounting rail earth terminals. and the metal 
cases of instruments.  
 
For pumps with motor of 11kw the control panel shall also incorporate, at a minimum, 
the following:  
• Power meter with volts, power factor, Kw, Kwh, power outage f or Kwh, etc. 
displays.  
• Power Factor Correction  
• Surge and Lightening protection  
 
In addition to the requirements outlined above in Section 5.19 , the Form 4 control panel 
shall incorporate the following requirements.  
  
5.20.1 Incomer Section  
 
The incomer compartment shall contain the following : 
 Suitable 4-pole (3 -phase and switched neutral) fuse switches with suitably -rated 
HRC fuses, mechanically interlocked and assembled to form a switch for the 
mains and standby generator supplies.  The switch shall be  labelled 
“Mains/Off/Generator” and the door shall be interlocked and padlockable in the 
“Off” position.  
 A phase failure, phase reversal and low voltage protection relay to provide a 
“Mains Failure” telemetry signal. The phase failure detection relay shall be 
connected downstream of the "Mains/Off/Generator" switch.  
 A set of fuses and a neutral link for the p hase failure relay and voltmeter  
 A control circuit transformer (CCT) for the common control compartment ( CCC),  
 A power monitoring facilities if the rating of each pump unit is above 10 kW  
 A fuse-fed, single phase and neutral distribution board, complying  with BS EN 
61439 -3, with integral isolator and hinged cover. All MCBs, RCDs and RCBOs 
incorporated within the distribution board shall comply with BS EN 60898, BS EN 
61008 and BS EN 61009, respectively, and be padlockable in the “Off” position.  
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
126 
 5.20.2 Control Circuit Supply  
 
The control circuit supply voltage shall be 110v AC or 24v DC.  The common control and 
motor starter functional units shall each be provided with a dedicated control circuit 
transformer . The common control and motor starters shall ea ch be provided with a 
means of switching, isolation and short -circuit protection for the incoming control circuit 
supplies. Control circuit supplies shall be energised when the associated fuse switch is 
in the “On” position.  The primary and secondary windi ngs of all CCTs shall be protected 
by fuses or double pole MCBs. Removable neutral links shall be provided if protection is 
afforded by fuses.  
 
5.20.3 Motor Starter Compartments  
 
The motor starter compartment shall contain the following:  
 A triple -pole fuse  switch with three suitably -rated HRC fuses and auxiliary 
switching of all live and neutral control circuits (complete with test position).  
 A 3-phase thermal overload relay with single phasing protection  
 
All motor protection systems shall be of the elect rically -latched and manually -reset type . 
The operating handle for the fuse switch shall be door -interlocked and padlockable in 
the “Off” position . Each mo tor start compartment shall include the following:  
   
a) a “Hand/Off/Auto” selector switch.  
b)  “Common Fault Reset push button.  
c) “Pump Unit Start” push button.  
d) “Pump Unit Stop” push button.  
e) “Pump Unit tripped lamp.  
f) “Pump Unit Running” lamp.  
g)  “Auto -available” lamp.  
h) individual fault lamps.  
i) Amp meter per pump  
j) Hour Run clock per pump  
 
5.21 Earthing  and Bonding  
 
The assembly earthing system shall incorporate an earth bar or main earth stud. The 
earth bar or stud shall be provided with facilities for connecting to the main earth 
terminal provided by the electrical power supplier.  
Each metal gland pla te shall be connected directly to the earth bar or stud by a separate 
protective conductor. Protective conductors shall be sized to withstand the fault level, 
subject to a minimum cross -sectional area (CSA) of 6 mm2. 
 
Separate earth bars or studs shall be provided for connecting equipment requiring a 
clean earth or an intrinsically -safe earth directly to the Mains Earth Terminal. If required, 
such earth bars or studs shall be located adjacent to the equipment requiring a clean 
earth or an intrinsically -safe earth, as appropriate.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
127 
  
5.21.1  Earth Electrode  
 
The earthing system shall be designed and installed to include the earthing and bonding 
of all exposed metalwork . A main earth bar and earth rod or mat system  shall be 
provided. T he earth rod resistance shall be tested when disconnected from the rest of 
the earthing system.  A stud terminal shall also be provided in the kiosk for connection of 
the mobile generator star point to the earth electrode . The earth electrode shall provide 
a maximum effective earth resistance of 10 Ohms or less.  The earth rod resistance shall 
be tested when disconnected from the rest of the earthing system. The earth elect rode 
shall be connected to the power supplier’s  main earth terminal (MET) via a removab le 
test link.  
 
5.21.2  Bonding  
 
All extraneous conductive parts of the pumping station shall be connected to the main 
earthing terminal . The bonding conductor shall be connected to the various connection 
points in the kiosk, valve chamber and wet well. The bonding  conductor shall be 
continuous and not cut at each connection.  Metallic cable and wiring support systems 
shall be bonded to all non -electrical services . 
 
5.22 Pumping Station Control Panel Enclosure   
 
A pump station control kiosk enclosure shall be provided to accommodate metering 
equipment, pump control panels, telemetry equipment , heating and lighting system s, a 
socket point for a standby generator, a 220V and 110 V external use socket, etc. The 
power supplier will provide a sepa rate kiosk for the electrical supply.  
 
The minimum size of the kiosk for Type 1 and Type 2 pump stations shall be 1,200mm 
(L) x 1,800mm (H) x 1,200mm (D). The minimum size of kiosk for the Type 3 pump 
stations shall be 2,000mm (L) x 2,000mm (H) x 1,2 00mm ( D). In all instances there shall 
be a clear minimum working space between the front of the panel and the plinth edge of 
750mm. The roof of the unit shall have a slope front to back. Standard warning notices 
shall be placed on the kiosk to warn of danger. The size of the power supplier’s kiosk 
shall be to ESB Network ’s requirements.  
 
The kiosk shall be a of a ‘walk - in’ design with open base and one piece roof that slopes 
to the rear.  The kiosk shall be supported on a reinforced concrete plinth extending 
150mm in each direction beyond the external plan dimensions of the kiosk. The plinth 
shall have a level finish, with 25mm chamfered edges, 150mm above the finished 
ground level. The ki osk shall be bolted to the plinth through a bottom flange with 
galvanised mild steel or stainless steel anchor bolts. The bottom flange shall be seated 
on a neoprene gasket and sealed with mastic to prevent ingress of water.   
 
The plinth shall incorporate  appropriate ducting to connect into the site power, telemetry 
and control ducts to facilitate cabling between the kiosk and the various chambers IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
128 
 within the pumping station site. Long radius bends shall be incorporated in the ducting, 
sharp elbows shall no t be used.  
 
The walls, roof and doors of the kiosk shall be constructed from either galvanised mild 
steel, 3mm minimum thick welded plate, with polyester coated finish, or in stainless 
steel in severe environments. Metallic kiosks shall be fully bonded an d earthed. 
Alternative forms of kiosk construction other than galvanised mild steel  or stainless steel  
will generally be required in areas subject to vandalism, e.g. enclosure of the kiosk(s) in 
a block -work or reinforced concrete enclosure with vandal pro of doors.  
 
The edges of the kiosk doors shall be stiffened by steel sections. The rear wall of the 
kiosk shall be reinforced with stainless steel sections to which a marine plywood  board , 
18mm thick , is fixed to support the electrical assemblies associated with the pumping 
plant.  
 
The walls of the kiosk shall have turned bottom flanges, with suitably factory formed 
holes  to accommodate the bolts securing the kiosk to the concrete plinth. The bottom 
holes shall be reinforced with 5mm thick steel plate, welded to the steel wall of steel 
fabricated kiosks. The holding down bolts shall be galvanised mild steel or stainless 
steel expanding anchor bolts complete with large washers. The bolts shall be locate d at 
suitable intervals to prevent bottom flange distortion.  
 
The quality of the kiosk construction shall ensure that the following is achieved:  
5.22.1  A thermal transmittance of 1.5W per m2K.  
5.22.2  A fire resistance (retention of stability, integrity and insulation)  
equivalent to Class 2 of BS 476, when tested in accordance with BS 
476 fo r a period exceeding 30 minutes.   
5.22.3  An IP rating of IP55 at least or equivalent.  
 
The preferred exterior colour of the kiosk is dark green (to BS 4800  (2011) 14C 39).  
 
The doors of t he kiosk shall be single or double leaf steel with multiple locks to LPS 
1175, SR 3 or IS EN 1627. There shall be a minimum double lock with bolts that engage 
into the sill and header as well as between the two leaves or leaf and frame. The 
leading edge of the leaves shall have rebated edges or fitted with astragals. The door 
leaves shal l be fitted with vandal -resistant stainless steel hinges and self -latching stays 
to restrain the door in the fully opened position (minimum opening angle of 90 degrees).  
 
The kiosk shall be fitted with suitably sized weather resistant and vermin resistant  
ventilation grills, complete with fly screens. These grills shall be fitted at low level at one 
side of the kiosk and at high level at the opposite side of the kiosk so that cross 
ventilation is achieved. Ventilation within the kiosk shall be sufficient t o restrict 
temperature in the kiosk, under all weather conditions, to a maximum of 40 degree 
Centigrade at any one time and to an average of 35 degree Centigrade over a 24 hour 
period.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
129 
 The kiosk shall be fitted with a small opening, complete with a locka ble, hinged panel, 
lockable from the inside. It shall be located opposite the electrical assembly to provide 
access for standby generator facilities.  
 
Where additional security is required  or where specified in the Planning approval , a 
structure for the housing of the control panel and associated equipment shall be 
constructed of block  work, 215mm solid block  to IS EN 771  – Part 3 , with smooth render 
finish internally and externally (or alternative agreed by Irish Water subject to the 
requirements of Planning). The block work shall be supported on a reinforced concrete 
support slab finished 150mm above general finished ground level . The structure shall 
have a 150mm reinforced concrete roof slab, projecting 150mm outside of the wall, with 
drip beading, complete with asphalt to provide a weatherproof roof. The structure shall 
have galvanised steel security doors, twin leaf, opening ou tward and fitted with 
furnishing as outlined above for the kiosk. Appropriate ventilation, openings, etc. as 
described above for the kiosk shall be provided to achieve the same environmental 
parameters as outlined. The structure shall also be equipped with  lighting, ventilation, 
welfare facilities, etc. to allow maintenance and monitoring to be carried out.  
 
An additional Kiosk, to the local ESB Network ’s requirements, shall be provided within 
the pumping station site  to house the panel, electricity suppli er’s meter, etc. , complete 
with separate dedicated ducting for the power service provider electrical supply 
incoming feed.  Separate security control a rrangements , to the local ESB Network’s 
requirements,  shall be provided for the power supplier’s access  to this kiosk for meter 
reading.  
 
5.23 Control Philosophy  
 
The pumping station shall be designed to operate in the following modes:  
 
a) Automatic mode – in this mode of operation the control system shall operate the 
pumping station automatically, without need for manual intervention. and  
b) Manual mode – in this mode of operation, the control system is overridden and 
the operator can operate the pump units manually via the pushbutton switches 
mounted on the door of the Assembly (Form 1B) or motor starter compartme nts 
(Form 4).  
 
The pumping station control system shall allow for auto reset in the event of a power 
failure. The pump units shall be operated in response to the level of effluent in the wet 
well. For all types of pumping station, an ultrasonic level contr ol system shall be 
provided together with a separate high level float switch.  
 
The relays within the ultrasonic level controller shall be configured to achieve the 
following pump unit control philosophy based on the four level set points as follows:  
 
a) Le vel rising through ‘snore’ level – no action.  
b) Level rising through duty/standby pump unit stop level – no action.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
130 
 c) Level rising through duty pump unit start level – start duty pump unit.  
d) Level rising to High Level - turn on duty pump or switch to s tandby via float 
switch.  
e) Level falling through duty pump unit start level – no action.  
g) Level falling through duty/standby pump unit stop level – stop duty pump . 
h) Level falling through ‘snore’ level – inhibit both pump units . 
i)  In the event of low  flow and high level – stop start duty pump and start stand -
by pump unit  and p ump fault alarm raised.  
 
The ultrasonic level controller shall have a facility to provide sequential rotation of pump 
units, to sequentially rotate the pump unit duty/standby st atus each time all pump units 
are stopped to ensure equal pump unit usage, as well as allowing individual pumps to 
be operated.  
 
The ultrasonic level controller shall be configured to initiate a wet well cleaning (‘snore’) 
cycle once a day. The ‘snore’ lev el shall be chosen to be as low as possible without 
affecting the safe/effective operation of the pump units. the pump unit manufacturer 
shall be consulted to this end.  
 
The ultrasonic level controller shall be configured so that the wet well level reading s are 
displayed in the kiosk, and if required, transmitted via telemetry.  
 
The ultrasonic level controller shall be configured so that the ‘zero level’ reading in the 
wet well corresponds to the level of the wet well. The span of the ultrasonic range shall  
be set up at. ‘snore’ level i.e. the level below which the pump units cannot pump 
anymore.  
 
The Ultrasonic shall be configured to transmit a "Loss of Echo" alarm to telemetry if 
there is an interruption/loss of signal from the ultrasonic transducer in the  wet well (the 
pumping station will be effectively under back -up level control until the fault is 
rectified).In the event of the above, the Ultrasonic shall de -energise all pump unit relays 
to remove pump unit control from the Ultrasonic Local Control (ULC ). 
 
To prevent "nuisance" switching between ULC and back -up control, the ULC shall be 
configured so that transmission of alarms/de -energising of pump unit relays only occurs 
if there is an interruption/loss of signal for a time period greater than one minu te. 
 
5.24 Testing  
 
The pump units shall be tested on site to ensure they are capable of delivering the 
design flow rate under all possible operating conditions, without cavitation or excessive 
noise, vibration, temperature or leakage.  This shall be recorded in a commissioning plan 
which shall also note:  
 
 The make, model and serial number of the pump.  
 Flowrate  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
131 
  Amps  
 Date of test.  
 
A visual inspection of the pumping station shall be made to ensure it complies with this 
Specification  and that it is constructed in accordance with the agreed design, and 
consistent with the agreed designs, specifications and site layout, including features 
relating to access, egress and safety assessment. The wet well shall be checked for 
signs of stagna tion, vortices, pre -swirl and accumulation of solids. Functional checks 
shall be made of all installed instrumentation , including:  
 
 Sat test of panel (confirming the panel can undertake the items as per control 
philosophy)  
 Commissioning of flowmeter  
 Commis sioning of ultrasonic  
 Testing of building services  
 Commissioning of alarm system  
 Testing of the earthing (10 Ohms or less) and bonding  
 Review of the hardcopy of the Operation & Maintenance Manual (in one PVC 
hardback A4 folder).  
 
These checks shall be mad e in the presence of Irish Water.  
 
The Operation & Maintenance Manual, to be included in the Final Documents (as 
outlined in Section 1.8.9 ) is to include at a minimum:  
 General description of the pump station (i.e. number of houses, size & length of 
rising main, discharge point etc.)  
 General safety considerations of working in and near pumping stations  
 As-build drawings of pump station including showing the route of the rising main 
and electrical ducts  
 Commissioning sheets for the pumps and equipment  
 Blank sheets for ongoing Operation & Maintenance duties.  
 Panel drawings  
 Pump curve  
 Pump O&M manual (including wiring diagram)  
 Exploded diagram of spare parts for the pump installed  
 Details of the alarm system including instruction on how to change phone 
numbe r etc.  
On the restoration of the power supply after a mains/phase failure, the control system 
shall automatically resume normal operation including where appropriate pump unit 
restart.   IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
The control system shall incorporate the following hard -wired pump unit protection 
systems:  
 motor overload protection.  
 motor over -temperature protection.  
 pump unit mechanical seal failure protection  
 
The pump seal leak sensor is for alarm monitoring only and shall only shut down the 
pump if it is installed in a hazardous area.  
 
If the hard -wired protection system is activated, the control system shall allow the 
operator a maximum of three remote resets after which the drive shall be locked out.  
The control panel shall provide for Volt Free Contacts as shown in the Table below. 
Should Irish Water wish to install a telemetry outstation to transfer data from the 
pumping station to an Irish Water control centre in future, the information will be freely 
available. A clear space of 450mm by 600mm is to be left on the kiosk backboard.  
The pump station shall be fitted with GSM dial out alarm , complete with battery backup . 
It shall be possible to text up to 5 numbers on the dial out alarm. The dial out alarm shall 
escalate the alarm message automatically if the first recipient does not respond to the 
alarm by acknowledging the fault. If the second person does not acknowledge the alarm 
message, forwarding the message to further subscribers shall occur. The escalation  can 
be traversed any number of times by looping back to the beginning of the escalation 
chain until the message is acknowledged. It shall be possible to configure dial out 
numbers. The dial out alarm shall be configured to send the following alarms:  
Flow meters shall be installed in chambers and these shall be suitably sized to 
accommodate the meter and allow access for maintenance. The flowmeter chamber 
shall be fully sealed with a drain to allow the discharge of liquid from the flowmeter 
chamber to the wet well.  If this is not possible due to site constraints, the chamber base 
shall incorporate a 300mm square , 300mm deep sump.  
 
The base and walls of the chamber shall be constructed in C30/37 concrete to IS EN 
206, 20mm aggregate size to IS EN 12620, with a minimum thickness of 250mm. The 
chamber shall be complete with a reinforced concrete roof formed with C30/37 
concrete, 20mm a ggregate size concrete of minimum thickness of 225mm, reinforced 
with high tensile reinforcement to BS 4449.  
 If precast concrete units are used for meter chamber construction, they shall conform to 
IS EN 1917  and IS 420 . Joints between the precast compon ents shall provide 
equivalent water resistance as required in IS EN 1992 – Part 3. The precast units shall 
be surrounded with not less than 150mm thickness of Grade C20/25 to IS EN 206, 
20mm aggregate size to IS EN 12620.  
 
The roof slab shall incorporate a 900mm x 900mm opening to allow the visual 
inspection of the meter and the removal of the meter vertically. Cast -in recessed lifting 
eyes shall be provided in each corner of the concrete roof slab to allow it ’s positioning in 
place. In addition, these lif ting eyes shall be used to remove the roof slab if required for 
access to the chamber to allow maintenance of the meter and its removal replacement if 
necessary.   
 
The internal dimensions of the chamber shall be sufficient to contain the meter and any 
associated pipework. The bolts and joints shall be visible and accessible in order to 
allow for maintenance and for the possible future replacement of the meter without  the 
need for excavation. The depth of the meter chamber shall provide a minimum of 
300mm clearance beneath the meter fitting. Sufficient clearance shall be provided 
between the walls and the meter equipment to allow maintenance and equipment 
replacement activities to be carried out.  
 
The chamber shall be fitted with Manhole  steps to comply with IS EN 13101, Type D, 
Class 1, galvanised mild steel and plastic encapsulated. Access to the confined space 
within the chamber shall not generally be required but w hen needed this access shall be 
by way of a safe access plan.   
 
The cover shall be sufficient for a 900mm by 900mm opening. It shall be capable of 
withstanding imposed loads and shall comply with IS EN 124, D400 if located on 
roadways or footways. Lower l oad capacity rated covers may be used if the chamber is 
located off road in green areas, subject to Irish Water approval. The covers and frames 
shall be sealed water tight where the pump stations would be subject to 
inundation/submergence.  
 
The cover fram es shall be supported on Class B engineering brick to IS EN 771 – Part 
2. The brickwork shall be bedded in mortar, minimum M30 strength to IS EN  998-Part 
2:2010. The frame and cover shall be in rapid hardening cementitious, epoxy resin or 
polyester resin m ortar. The mortar shall have a minimum working time of 15 minutes 
and shall reach a minimum compressive strength of 30 N/mm2 and minimum tensile 
strength of 5 N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing. The covers shall be set on the brick to 
finish in alignment with the pump station hard standing surface. Meter chamber covers, 
where located in grass areas, shall be surrounded by a concrete plinth, 200mm all 
round and 100mm deep formed with C20/25 concrete to IS EN 206, 20mm aggregate 
size to IS EN 12620, bedded in Cla use 804 material. The plinth shall be surrounded 
along its external perimeter by a stainless steel metal band.  
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
135 
 5.29  Cable Ducts and Chambers  
 
Kiosk plinth shall incorporate appropriate ducting to connect into the power, telemetry 
and control ducts to facilitate cabling between the kiosk and the various plant items 
associated with the kiosk. Long radius bends shall be incorporated in the ducting,  sharp 
elbows shall not be used. The ducting shall be in accordance with IS EN 61386 -24. 
Ducts used for ESB Networks cables shall be in accordance with ESB Networks 
specification  16113 and IS 370 colour code .  
 
The ducting diameter and number shall be appr opriate for the cables required and the 
minimum duct size shall be 100mm diameter. The ducts shall be red unless otherwise 
specified. All ducts shall have a minimum cover of 600mm. The duct pipes shall be 
bedded, haunched and surrounded in sand. Clause 808  backfill granular material, in 
accordance with the National Road’s Authority Specification for Road Works, shall be 
provided above the sand surround. Long radius bends may be used for direction 
changes up to 45 degrees, duct chambers shall be provided for  changes in direction 
above this. Marker tape shall be provided above the duct pipe runs and shall 
incorporate reinforced tracing wire. The ducting shall be constructed watertight and built 
into the base of the kiosk and the walls of the miscellaneous cham bers. All cable ducts 
shall be provided with draw cords/ropes to allow the pull through of the cables.  
 
A drain shall be provided from the lowest positioned cable duct chamber to a soak away 
to allow any water ingress to be drained from the duct system. The ducts, or duct banks, 
shall be located 150mm above the floor of the duct chamber.   
 
Ducts shall be provided between the control panels and the various units of the 
pumping station which require cable runs for power, telemetry and control. All power 
and control cable ducts between the pump chamber and the control panel shall be fully 
sealed to prevent ingress of gas from the pump sump and valve chamber to the kiosk 
containing the panels. This shall be achieved using non -degradable expandable foam or 
gas tight sealing glands. Spare draw wires shall be left in all ducts for future use.  
 
Ducts shall be provided as follows : 
 
 The ESB’s incoming power cable :- one duct shall be provided, sized in 
accordance with the power supplier’s specification (e.g., colour, size, etc.) and 
routed between the point of supply and the kiosk plinth in accordance with the 
ESB Network ’s requirements.  
 The installation earth cable :- one duct shall be provided, 50 mm in diameter, and 
routed between the point of supply and the kiosk p linth.  
 The pump unit cables :- two ducts shall be provided, 100 mm in diameter, and 
routed between the wet well, valve chamber and the kiosk plinth,  
 The ultrasonic level sensor and float switch cables :- one duct shall be provided, 
100 mm in diameter, and r outed between the wet well, valve chamber and the 
kiosk plinth.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
136 
  The flow meter :- one duct shall be provided, 100 mm in diameter and routed 
between the flow meter sensor and the kiosk plinth.  
 The minimum segregation/separation between Band 1 (ELV signal) and Band 2 
(LV power) cables shall be 300 mm.  
 Ducts shall terminate approximately 75 mm proud of the surface of the plinth.  
 The d epth of cover in soft ground shall be a minimum of 750 mm above the  
crown of the duct.  
 On completion, all ducts shall have a swab drawn through to clear them of 
obstructions.  
 Ducts shall be left with an excess 1 m length of draw  cord in place, anchored at 
each end.  
 Ducts shall have sufficient space to enable the installa tion and removal of any 
cable without the need to remove any other cable or component.  
 Ducts shall incorporate adequate facilities to locate and support the cables.  
 Conduit shall be provided for installation of the cables associated with the kiosk 
lightin g systems, heating systems and/or socket outlets.  
 Cable ducts shall be sealed using a gas -tight sealing technique (not foam).  
 
Where deemed necessary, d uct chambers  shall be installed at bends and these shall 
have a minimum 900mm by 900mm internal dimensions. The base and walls of the 
cable duct chambers shall be constructed in C30/37 concrete  to IS EN 206 , 20mm 
aggregate size  to IS EN 12620 , with a minimum thickness  of 225mm. Chambers of the 
above dimensions will not require a roof. A concrete roof slab shall be provided if 
chambers of larger dimensions are required. The roof in this instance shall be 
constructed  of reinforced concrete formed with C30/37 concrete  to IS EN 206 , 20mm 
aggregate size  to IS EN 12620 , of 225mm minimum thickness, reinforced with high 
tensile reinforcement to BS 4449.  
 
The opening shall be 900mm x 900mm to allow access to the cable chamber. The cover 
to the chamber opening shall be sufficien t for a 900mm by 900mm opening. It shall be 
capable of withstanding imposed loads and shall comply with IS EN 124 , D400 if 
located on roadways or footways. Lower load capacity rated covers may be used if the 
chamber is located off road in green areas, subj ect to Irish Water approval.  
 
The cover frames shall be supported on the chamber walls, if the chamber dimension is 
900mm by 900mm. It shall be supported on the chamber roof slab if such is provided. In 
this instance the cover frame shall be supported on Class B engineering brick to IS EN 
771 – Part 2 . The brickwork shall be bedded in mortar, minimum M30 strength to IS EN  
998-Part 2:2010. The frame and cover shall be set in rapid hardening cementitious, 
epoxy resin or polyester resin mortar. The mortar shall have a minimum working time of 
15 minutes and shall reach a minimum compressive strength of 30 N/mm2 and minimum 
tensile strength of 5 N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing  The covers shall be set on the brick 
to finish in alignment with the pump station hard standing surface.  
 
Duct chamber covers, where located in grass areas, shall be surrounded by a concrete 
plinth, 200mm all round and 100mm deep formed with C20/25 concre te to IS EN 206 , IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
137 
 20mm aggregate size  to IS EN 12620 , bedded in Clause 804 material. The plinth shall 
be complete with bull -nose finish to its perimeter and shall be provided with a mild steel 
reinforcement link.  
 
5.30  Lifting Equipment  
           
Suitable cast in davit sockets shall be provided in the roof slab of the pumping station. 
Davit sockets shall be designed and positioned to provide lifting equipment with a 
vertical pull on the pump unit lifting attachments, to enable pump units to be read ily 
raised or lowered on their guide rails. Cover plates, flush with the top of the surrounding 
concrete, shall be provided to prevent the ingress of water and debris into the sockets.  
 
The davit sockets shall be suitable to accommodate lifting davits and lifting tackle to 
permit the safe lifting of the pump installation . The minimum rating of the davit, lifting 
tackle, etc. will be 500kg, safe working load (SWL). Lifting davits, tackle and sockets will 
be rated to lift twice the weight of each pump unit, s ubject to a safe working load of 
500kg. The d avits sockets shall be of stainless steel or galvanised mild steel in 
accordance with the safety certificate requirements.   
 
In some instances, Irish Water may require a permanent lifting gantry instead of a davit 
arrangement. In these situations, Irish Water shall be consulted in relation to the specific 
requirements. Such gantries shall be fabricated of galvanised structural  steel and shall 
be permanently fixed on concrete support plinths, suitably sized, through base plates 
with anchor bolts. Such gantries shall be load tested and certified as outlined above. 
The manufacturer’s name and the SWL of the lifting equipment shall b e stamped on a 
stainless steel plate attached to the equipment. The lifting gantry shall be provided with 
a block and tackle, which shall be load -tested and rated along with the gantry assembly.  
Sites with such lifting equipment shall be fenced in accordan ce with the details outlined 
in Section 5.6  above.   
 
5.31  Wash -Down Facilities  
 
Pumping stations shall be provide d with wash -down facilities for cleaning and washing 
mechanical plant following its removal for routine maintenance , repair  and/or 
replacement . This shall comprise a cold water supply with an external lockable tap, 
suitably insulated to prevent freezing of the supply system  and a length of water hose to 
extend to the wet well location . A 25mm water supply shall be provided to the pumping 
station site and this supply shall be fitted with a water usage meter. The supply pipe 
shall also be provided with an approved non -return valve to prevent backflow 
contamination of the public water supply system.   
 
5.32  Testing of Water Retai ning Structure s   
 
After cleaning, building in of all pipework and, as far as practicable , before any earth or 
other filling is placed against the outside of the wall faces, liquid retaining concrete 
structures designed to retain an aqueous liquid ( e.g. the wet well) shall be filled with IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
138 
 water at a uniform rate of not greater than 2m in 24 hours. A period of 21 days shall be 
allowed for stabilisation, after which the water level shall be recorded at 24 -hour 
intervals for at least 7 days. During the t est period, the total permissible drop, after 
allowing for evaporation and rainfall, shall not exceed 1/500 of the average water depth 
of the full tank or 10mm, whichever is the lesser.  
 
If the requirements of the 7 -day test are not met, after completion of any remedial 
works, the structure shall be refilled and, if necessary, left for a further stabilisation 
period after which the water level shall be recorded at 24 -hour intervals, for a test period 
of 7 days.  
 
Notwithstanding the satisfactory completion  of the above test, any leakage visible on the 
outside faces of the structure shall be stopped. Any caulking or making good of cracks 
in the wall section shall, where practicable, be carried out from the inside face.  
 
The hydraulic test of the structure s hall be carried out after successful completion of the 
roof test and before any sealing is undertaken.  
 
Adjacent internal chambers within the structure shall be tested separately and 
sequentially. Chambers adjacent to the test chamber shall be empty durin g the test.  
 
After satisfactory completion of the test, the structure shall be emptied, as far as 
practicable, unless the water can be used as part of subsequent activities.  
 
When testing uncovered concrete structures, the test results shall be corrected  for 
observations of the gain in water from precipitation or the loss of water from 
evaporation. This difference can be measured by placing a transparent, floating, open 
container (calibrated and partially filled) in the structure. The container shall be 
positioned away from the sides and any overhead obstruction that may shield or shade 
the container. The container shall have sufficient freeboard to accommodate the 
precipitation from normal rainfall and be overtopped by waves generated by the wind.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
139 
 Appendix A  
 
Standards R eference d in the Wastewater Code of Practice  
 
Standard Type:  
 
IS  Irish Standard  
BS   British Standard  
IS EN   European Standard adopted as an Irish Standard  
BS EN  European Standard adopted as a British Standard  
WIS   UK Water Industry Specification  
 
Standard 
Type  Standard 
Number  Title 
IS EN  124 Gully Tops, Manhole Tops for Vehicular and Pedestrian Areas 
– Design Requirements, Type, Testing, Marking, Quality Levels 
(See also BS EN 124)  
IS  261 Water Services Road Furniture – Requirements for Cast Iron 
Cover and Frames  
BS 7903  Guide to Selection and Use of Gully Tops and Manholes for 
Installation within Highways.  
IS EN  206 Concrete Specification, Performance, Production and 
Conformity  
(See also BS EN 206:2013)  
BS 8500 -1 Concrete – Complementary British Standard to BS EN 206 -1, 
Part 1 – Method of Specifying and Guidance for Specifier.  
BS 8500 -2 Concrete – Complementary British Standard to BS EN 206 -1, 
Part 2 – Specification for Constituent Materials and Concrete.  
IS EN  197 Cement  
Part 1: - Composition, Specification and Conformity Criteria for 
Common Cements.  
Part 2: - Conformity Evaluation  
IS EN  1996  Design of Masonry Structures – General Rules for Reinforced 
and Unreinforced Masonry Structures (Including Irish National 
Index)  
IS EN  13242  Aggregates for Unbound and Hydraulically Bound Material for 
Use in Civil Engineering Works and Road Construction  
BS EN  1092 -1 Flanges and Their Joints – Circular Flanges for Pipes, Valves, 
Fittings and Accessories – PN Designations  
Part 1: - Steel Flanges.  
BS 4449  Steel for Reinforcement of Concrete – Bar, Coil and De -coiled 
Product - Specification   
BS 381C  Specification for Colour for Identification, Colour and Special 
Purposes  
BS 6076  Specification for Polymeric Film for Use as a Protective IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
140 
 Sleeving for Buried Pipes and Fittings (for Site and Factory 
Application)  
BS 9124  Specification for steel and aluminium access cover s ystems 
with over 1m clear opening  
WIS 4-08-02 Specification for Pipe Bedding and Side -fill Materials for Buried 
Pipelines (IGN 4 -08-01 Information and Guidance Note on 
Bedding and Side -fill Materials for Buried Pipelines.  
IS EN  12620  Aggregate for Concrete (See also SR16 – Guidance for Use of 
IS EN 12620)  
SR 16 Guidance for the Use of IS EN 12620:2002 (Aggregate for 
Concrete)  
BS 5834  Surface Boxes, Guards and Underground Chambers for the 
Purposes of Utilities – Part 2 - Specification for Surface B oxes  
BS 5834  Surface Boxes, Guards and Underground Chambers for the 
Purposes of Utilities – Part 4 - Specification for Utility 
Chambers  
BS EN  1561  Grey Cast Iron  
IS EN  771 Specification for Masonry Units  
Part 2: - Calcium Silicate masonry Units  
Part 3: - Aggregate Concrete masonry Units (Dense and 
Lightweight Aggregate)  
BS EN  12613  Plastic Warning Devices for Underground Cables and Pipelines 
with Visual Characteristics  
WIS 4-32-08 Specification for Fusion Jointing of Polyethylene Pressure 
Pipeline Systems Using PE80 and PE100 Materials  
WIS 4-32-15 Specification for PE80 and PE100 Spigot Fittings and Drawn 
Bends for Nominal Sizes up to and including 1000.  
WIS 4-32-17 Specification for PE80 and PE100 Electro Fusion Fittings for 
Nominal Size s up to and including 630.  
IGN 4-32-18 The Choice of pressure rating for Polyethylene Pipe Systems 
for Water Supply and Sewerage Duties  
IGN  4-01-03 Guide to Pressure Testing of Pressure Pipes and Fittings for 
use by Public Water Suppliers.  
WIS 4-35-01 Specification for Thermoplastics Structured Wall Pipes, Joints 
and Couplers with Smooth Bore for Gravity Sewers for the Size 
Range 150 – 900 Inclusive  
IS EN  752 Drain and Sewer Systems Outside Buildings  
(See also BS EN 752 2008 - Drain and Sewer Systems Outside 
Buildings)  
IS EN  1671  Pressure Sewerage Systems Outside Buildings  
(See also BS EN 1671:1997, Pressure Sewerage Systems 
Outside Buildings)  
IS 6 Concrete Sewer Pipes  
IS EN  1916  Concrete Pipes and Fittings, Unreinforced, Steel Fibre and 
Reinforced  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
141 
 (See also BS EN 1916)  
IS EN  1917  Concrete Manholes and Inspection Chambers, Unreinforced, 
Steel Fibre and Reinforced  
(See also BS EN 1917)  
BS 5911 -1 Concrete Pipes and Ancillary Concrete Products – Part 1  
Specification for Unreinforced Concrete Pipes (Including Pipe 
Jacking Pipes) and Fittings with Flexible Joints  
BS 5911 -3 Concrete Pipes and Ancillary Concrete Products – Part 3  
Specification for Unreinforced and Reinforced Concrete 
manholes and Soakways Complimentary to BS EN 1917.  
BS 5911 -4 Concret e Pipes and Ancillary Concrete Products – Part 4  
Specification for Unreinforced and Reinforced Concrete 
Inspection Chambers.  
BS 5911 -5 Concrete Pipes and Ancillary Concrete Products – Part 5  
Specification for Prestressed  Non-Pressure Pipes and Fittings 
with Flexible Joints.  
IS EN  13101  Steps for Underground Man Entry Chambers – Requirements, 
Markings, Testing and Evaluation of Conformance  
IS EN  14396  Fixed Ladders for Manholes  
(See also BS EN 14396 Fixed Ladders for Manholes)  
BS 4211  Specification for Permanently Fixed ladders  
IS EN  10025  Hot Rolled Products of Structural Steel (Part 1 – Part 6)  
(See also BS EN 10025:2004 Part 1 to Part 6)   
IS EN  1461  Hot Dipped Galvanised Coatings on Fabricated  Iron and Steel 
Articles – Specifications and Test Methods  
(See also BS EN ISO 1461)  
IS EN  10088  Part 1 – List of Stainless Steels  
Part 2 – Part 5 – Technical Delivery Conditions  
Part 3 – Stainless steels. Te chnical delivery conditions for 
semi -finished products, bars, rods, wire, sections and bright 
products of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes  
BS  4660  Thermoplastics Ancillary Fittings of Nominal Size 110 to 160 for 
Below Ground Gravity Draina ge and Sewerage  
BS EN  1401  Plastics Piping systems for Non -Pressure Underground 
Drainage and Sewerage – Unplasticized Poly Vinyl – Chloride 
(PVC -U) – Part 1 – Specification for Pipes, Fittings and the 
System  
IS EN  12201  Plastic Piping Systems for Water Supply Systems and 
Drainage and Sewerage Under Pressure.  
Part 1: - General,  
Part 2: - Pipes,  
Part 3: - Fittings,  
Part 4: - Valves for Water Supply systems,  
Part 5: Fitness for Purpose of the System.  
IS EN  13476  Plastic Piping Systems for Non -Pressure Underground IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
142 
 Drainage and Sewerage – Structural Wall Piping Systems of 
Unplasticized Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC -U), Polypropylene (PP) 
and Polyethylene (PE)  
Part 1 – General Requirements and Performance 
Characteristics  
Part 2 – Specification for Pipes and Fittings for Smooth Internal 
and External Surfaces and the System – Part A  
Part 3 - Specification for Pipes and Fittings for Smooth Internal 
and Profiled External Surface and the System – Part B  
IS EN  598 Ductile Iron Pipes, Fittings, Accessories and their Joints for 
Sewerage Applications, Requirements and Test Methods.  
BS EN  1074  Valves for Water Supply – Fitness for Purpose and Appropriate 
Specification Tests  
Part 1 – General Requirements  
Part 2 – Isola ting Valves  
Part 3 – Check Valves  
Part 4 - Air Valves  
Part 5 - Control Valves  
Part 6 - Hydrants  
BS ISO  7121  Steel Ball Valves for General Purposes – Industrial Application  
IS EN  1825  Grease Separators  
Part 1 Principles of Design, Performance and Testing, Marking 
and Quality Control  
Part 2 Selection of Nominal Size, Installation, Operation and 
Maintenance.   
IS EN  60079  Explosive Atmospheres (Part 0, Part 1, Part 2, Part 5, Part 6, 
Part 7, Part 10 -1, Part 10 -2, Part 11, Part 13, Part 14, Part 15, 
Part 17, Part 18, part 19, Part 20 -1, Part 25, Part 26, Part 27)  
IS EN  1992 -3 Eurocode 2 – Design of Concrete Structures - Part 3: Liquid 
Retaining and Containment Structures.  
IS EN  13101  Steps for Man Entry Chambers – Requirements, Marking, 
Testing and Evaluation of Conformity.  
IS EN  818-7 Short Link Chain for Lifting Purposes – Safety  
Part 7: Fine Tolerance Hoist Chain, Grade T (Types T, DAT 
and DT).  
BS 476 Fire Tests for Building Materials and Structures  
BS 4800  Schedule of Paint Colours for Building Purposes  
BS 9295  Guide to Structural Design for Buried Pipelines.  
BS 5163  Valves for Waterworks Purposes  
Part 1 – Predominantly key operated cast iron gate valves – 
Code of Practice  
Part 2 – Stem caps for use on isolating valves and associated 
water control apparatus - Specification  
BS 5837  Trees in Relation to Design, Demolition and Construction - 
Recommendations  
IS EN  1610  Construction and Testing of Drains and Sewers  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
143 
 IS 420 Precast Concrete Manholes  
IS EN   998 Specification for Mortar for  Masonry  
Part 1 – Rendering and plastering mortar  
Part 2 – Masonry mortar  
BS ISO  12176  Plastic Pipes and Fittings – Equipment for Fusion Jointing of 
Polyethylene Systems:  
Part 1 – Butt Fusion  
Part 2 – Electro Fusion  
IS EN  12842  Ductile Iron Fittings f or PVC -U or PE Pipe Systems – 
Requirement and Test Methods  
IS EN  14525  Ductile Iron Wide Tolerance Couplings and Flange Adaptors for 
use with Pipes of different materials: Ductile Iron, PVC -U, PE 
Fibre Cement.  
IS EN  1401  PVC piping systems for non-pressure underground drainage 
and sewerage  
IS EN  1074 -1 Valves for water supply. Fitness for purpose requirements and 
appropriate verification tests. General requirements  
IS EN  1074 -2 Valves for water supply - Fitness for purpose requirements and  
appropriate verification tests - Part 2: Isolating valves  
IS EN  1092 -1 Flanges and their joints - Circular flanges for pipes, valves, 
fittings and accessories, PN designated - Part 1: Steel flanges  
IS EN  1092 -2 Flanges and their joints - Circular flanges for pipes, valves, 
fittings and accessories, PN designated - Part 2: Cast iron 
flanges  
IS EN  14901  Ductile iron pipes, fittings and accessories. Epoxy coating 
(heavy duty) of ductile iron fittings and accessories. 
Requirements and test  
IS EN  1563  Foundin g. Spheroidal graphite cast irons  
IS EN  12613  Plastics warning devices for underground cables and pipelines 
with visual characteristics  
IS EN  1722 -12 Fences. Steel palisade fences. Manufacturing and installation. 
Specification  
IS EN  1722 -14 Fences. Specification for open mesh steel panel  
IS EN  1722 -16 Fences. Specification for powder coatings used as a plastics 
finish to components and mesh  
BS 4320  Specification for metal washers for general engineering 
purposes. Metric series  
BS 7874  Method of te st for microbiological deterioration of elastomeric 
seals for joints in pipework and pipelines  
BS 8545  Trees: from nursery to independence in the landscape. 
Recommendations  
BS EN  10025  Hot rolled products of structural steels. General technical 
delivery conditions  
BS EN  4449  Aluminium alloy AL -P7050. T76. Sheet. 0,8 mm $3L a $3L 6 
mm IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
144 
 BS EN  1201  Chemicals used for treatment of water intended for human 
consumption. Potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate  
WIS 4-52-01 Specification for polymeric anti - corrosio n (barrier) coatings  
WIS 4-52-03 Specification for anti - corrosion coatings on threaded fasteners  
WIS 4-21-02 Specification for mechanical couplings and repair clamps for 
iron pipes for the conveyance of cold potable water 
(underground use) for the size range 40 to 1600mm/1.5 to 48” 
inclusive.  
IGN 4-08-01 Bedding and sidefill materials for buried pipelines  
BS 1SO  21307  Plastics pipes and fittings. Butt fusion jointing procedures for 
polyethylene (PE) pipes and fittings used in the construction of 
gas and water distribution systems  
IS EN 
1SO 898-1 Mechanical properties of fasteners made of carbon steel and 
alloy steel. Bolts, screws and studs with specified property 
classes. Coarse thread and fine pitch thread  
IS EN 
1SO 898-2 Mechanical properties of fasteners made of carbon steel and 
alloy steel. Nuts with specified property classes. Coarse thread 
and fine pitch thread  
BS 1SO  3506 -1 Mechanical properties of corrosion -resistant stainless steel 
fasteners. Bolts, screws and studs Part 1  
 
BS 1SO  3506 -2 Mechanical properties of corrosion -resistant stainless steel 
fasteners.  
Part 2  
IS EN 
ISO 1461  Hot dip galvanized coatings on iron and steel articles – 
specifications and test methods  
lLPS  1175 -
SR2, 
SR3 The Requirements and Testing Procedures for the LPC B 
Approval and Listing of Intruder Resistant Building 
Components, Strongpoints, Security Enclosures and Free 
Standing Barriers”  
IP 2X Standardized measure of protection a device has against 
intrusions by liquid or dust . 
DSEAR   The Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres 
Regulations 2002 ( DSEAR ) 
BS EN  60309  Plugs, socket -outlets and couplers for industrial purposes. 
Dimensional interchangeability requirements for pin and 
contact -tube accessories of harmonized configurations  
BS EN  61439 -3 Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear assemblies. 
Distribution boards intended to be operated by ordinary 
persons (DBO)  
BS EN  60898  Specification for circuit -breakers for overcurrent protection for 
household and similar installations  
BS EN  61008  Specification for residual current operated circuit -breakers 
without integral overcurrent protection for household and 
similar uses (RCCBs)  
BS EN  61009  Residual current operated circuit -breakers with integral IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
145 
 overcurrent protection for household and similar uses 
(RCBOs). General rules  
IS EN  1627  European Standard for the burglar resistant classifications of 
domestic and commercial doorsets, windows, curtain walling, 
grilles and shutters  
IS EN  622 Parts 1 – 4 Fibreboards. Specifications. General requirements  
BS EN 50288 -7 Multi -element metallic cables used in analogue and digital 
communication and control. Sectional specification for 
instrumentation and control cables  
IS 162 Concrete marker posts, applicable to precast concrete posts 
fou use in marking the locat ions of hydrants, air valves and 
sluice valves  
BS 3251  Indicator plates for fire hydrants and emergency water supplies  
BS 476 Fire testing on building of materials  
EN 13598 -2 Plastics piping systems for non -pressure underground drainage 
and sewerage. Unplasticized poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC -U), 
polypropylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE). Specifications for 
manholes and inspection chambers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
146 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B  
 
Gravity Sewer Design Requirements    
 
General Note  
 
For Works in residential Developments, the sewer capacity criteria for a development 
are considered to be satisfied, without the need for a full Appendix B design 
assessment, where the pipe size and gradient requirements for the full potential 
development population corresponds to those in the first Table in Section 3.6 of the 
main body of the Code of Practice for Wastewater Infrastructure for the number of 
dwellings shown. For small numbers of housing units, the use of higher peak flow 
multipliers may be used for design purposes to reflect the proximity to source and the 
attenuation that naturally occurs in the Sewerage system.  
 
Otherwise, the gravity sewer systems in residential and commercial developments are 
to comply fully with Appendix B.  
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
147 
 1 DESIGN CRITERIA  
1.1  Internal Flooding from Wastewater Sewers  
 
Designs shall prevent internal flooding from an event with a 1 in 30 year return period. 
This is subject to (a) the 1 in 30 year return event requirement being applied to surface 
water or other flooding modes so that foul/combined sewers designed to the appropriate 
performance level are not inundated at more frequent return periods, and (b) the 1 in 3 0 
year return event level of service is a long term objective and a higher level of service 
for the new design may have to be provided to achieve the long term objective.  
On a project by project basis flood protection shall be evaluated for a 1 in 50 year return 
period event. If there is marginal difference between the 1 in 30 year return period event 
period and 1 in 50 year solution, the higher return period solution shall be offered as the 
preferred solution.  
A definition of Internal Sewer Flooding is pro vided in Section 1.8.1 below . 
For new or upgraded sewer networks the design shall incorporate a target freeboard 
between the predicted design top water level and the lowest ground level adjacent to 
the perimeter of the building being considered of 500mm. W here target freeboard 
cannot be achieved , Irish Water’s Connections and Developer Services shall be 
consulted.  
1.2      External Flooding from Wastewater  sewers  
 
Designs shall prevent external flooding from an event with a 1 in 20 year return period. 
This is s ubject to (a) the 1 in 20 year return period event requirement being applied to 
surface water or other flooding modes so that foul/combined sewers designed to the 
appropriate performance level are not inundated at more frequent return periods, and 
(b) the 1 in 20 year event period level of service is a long term objective and a higher 
level of service for the new design may have to be provided to achieve the long term 
objective.  
On a project by project basis flood protection shall be evaluated for a 1 in 30  year return 
period event. If there is only a marginal difference between the 20 year return period 
event and 30 year return period event solution, the higher return period solution shall be 
offered as the preferred solution.  
A definition of External Sewer Flooding is provided in Section 1.8.2 below . IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
148 
  
For new or upgraded sewer networks the design shall incorporate a target freeboard 
between the predicted design top water level and the cover level of 500mm.  Where 
target freeboa rd cannot be achieved Wastewater Asset Planning shall be consulted.  
1.3     External Surface Water Flooding  
Surface water shall be managed to allow it pass around premises and buildings without 
harm. This may involve working with Local Authorities, Transport Infrastructure Ireland 
(TII) and the Office of Public Works (OPW) to make use of existing features.  
 
No external property flooding shall arise from a 1 in 20 year return period event. Surface 
water flooding may be allowed to occur in a controlled manner in  specified locations 
with only minor detriment to property and people without the need for extensive 
underground systems to contain it. The emphasis of a surface water design shall be to 
manage flood water.  
 
On a project by project basis flood protection s hall be evaluated for a 1 in 30 year event. 
If there is marginal difference between the 1 in 20 year return period event and 1 in 30 
year return period event solution, the higher return period solution shall be offered as 
the preferred solution.  
1.4   Protecti on Against Surcharging  
New sewers shall be designed such that they do not surcharge under the relevant 
design rainfall event taking account of site and location factors.  The most appropriate 
design return period listed in Table 1, which is based on IS EN 752 Table 2 - “Examples 
of design rainfall frequencies for pipes to run just full without surcharge”, will be applied. 
The same approach shall also be applied to existing systems being considered for 
upgrading.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
149 
 Site Factors  Location Factors  Design  
Return Period  
Sites with average surface 
gradient greater than 1%  Rural Areas  1 year  
Sites with average surface gradient 
of less than 1%  Residential Areas  2 years  
Sites where consequence of 
flooding is severe. e.g. existing 
basements adjacent to new 
developments.  City Centres / 
Industrial/Commercial 
Areas  5 years  
Sites where consequence of 
flooding is severe with risk to 
general public and critical 
services.  Underpasses  10 years  
Table 1.1: Surcharge Design Return Periods  
1.5    Downstream Conditions  
The following shall be identified and taken into account in the design:  
(a) Any downstream water level restrictions (tidal or river levels), in particular 
maximum flood levels in the receiving water bodies.  
(b) Backing up from downstream hydraulic constraints such  as network throttles, 
pumping stations, WWTPs etc.  
1.6    Flow Velocities  
 
Sewers should be designed achieve velocities that:  
 
1. Transport fine particles in suspension.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
150 
 2. Transport coarser granular material as bed load.  
3. Erode cohesive particles from a de posited bed.  
 
In order to minimise the maintenance requirements of any given length of sewer, it is 
normal to design the sewer to be “self -cleansing”. This means that the sewer is 
designed to achieve a velocity at least once per day that will carry all solid deposited 
material along the pipe and not leave any materials deposits in the invert of the sewer.  
Separate wastewater and combined sewers should be designed to ensure that a flow 
velocity within the sewer is exceeded daily at the appropriate multipl e of the Dry 
Weather Flow (DWF) for the initial development flows.  Where self -cleansing velocities 
cannot be achieved due to constraints, Irish Water shall be consulted in detail 
concerning alternative procedures to address the requirements outlined in It ems 1, 2 
and 3 above. The table below is based on the simplified CIRIA method of assessing 
self-cleansing velocities in separate wastewater sewers and should be considered as 
the minimum design velocities. Storm and surface water sewers require generally 
higher self -cleansing velocities because of the higher particle densities and should be 
designed to ensure that the velocity of 1.0 m/s is achieved. Oversizing the pipe to 
achieve suitable full bore velocities at lesser gradients will not be accepted.   
 
Pipe Size  
(mm)   
Approximate self 
cleansing velocity 
(m/sec)  
 
200-300 0.75 
400 0.77 
500 0.82 
600 0.86 
900 0.88 
1200  1.03 
 
Table 1.2: Self -cleansing Velocities Separate Wastewater Sewers  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
151 
 Where large diameter sewers over 900mm diameter are laid to steep gradients, very 
high flow velocities occur. For example, a 1050mm pipe laid to 1:100 gradient with a 
depth of flow of 750mm will have a flow velocity approaching 3.4m/sec, which is 
unaccepta ble in wastewater sewers. The designer should implement energy dissipation 
measures in such cases. It should be emphasised that scour in pipes at these velocities 
is not a significant problem with modern materials, but if velocities become very high, 
odour  emissions can be increased and noise can become a problem.  
 
As a general rule, it is preferable to aim to achieve self -cleansing velocity in the pipe 
system at least once per day. The designer should aim to achieve a flow velocity at the 
design flow (i.e . peak flow) of between the required self -cleansing velocity and a velocity 
of 2.0m/s, with 2.5m/s as an upper limit.  
 
In small sewers, below 375mm it is not necessary to include measures to limit flow 
velocity. The use of backdrop Manhole s in this case m ay be justified where there is a 
significant difference in level between branch sewers and trunk sewers. In this case, the 
economics may justify the construction of a backdrop to minimise excavation for the 
branch sewer trenches. The discharge from a backd rop into a Manhole  requires careful 
design to prevent flows from washing over the benching. Backdrops for large diameter 
sewers are complex structures that may involve the creation of vortices to dissipate 
energy, for which specialist design is required.  
 
The governing flow to achieve minimum design velocities shall be as follows:  
 
 
Sewer Type  
 Governing Flows1 
 
Separate 
Wastewater  
  
2 x Eqn. 1 with a peaking factor set to 1.0  
 
 
Combined   
Eqn. 2  with 1 in 1 year storm and 2 x 
Eqn.1 with peaking factors set to 1.0  
 
 
Surface   
1 in 1 year rainfall event  
 
 
Table 1.3: Governing Flow for Minimum Design Velocities  
 
 
                                                           
1 Refer Section 2.2 for Equations  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
152 
 1.7    Hydraulic Equations  
 
The Colebrook -White Equation shall be used for pipe and channel flow calculations.  
1.8   Pipe Roughness  
 
Typical roughness coefficient values for the pipes shall be as follows:  
 
Type  
 Concrete  uPVC  
 
Separate Wastewater  
 1.5 mm  O.15  
 
Surface  
 0.6 mm  0.15 
 
Combined  
 1.5 mm  0.15 
 
Table 1.4: Typical Roughness Coefficient Values  
1.8   Internal and External Sewer Flooding  
 
1.8.1 Internal Sewer Flooding  
 
A property  can be deemed  affected  by an internal  flooding incident  when foul, combined 
flows  escape  from the public  sewerage  system  into a property  and enters  a building  or 
passes  below  a suspended  floor.   
Internal  flooding  refers  to buildings  which  are normally  occupied  and used  for 
residential,  public,  commercial,  business  or industrial  purposes.  For clarity t he list 
below gives examples of what should be included in the internal flooding category.  
 Conservatories  
 Basements and cellars (even if unoccupied)  
 Stairwell/lobby area of flats (to be counted as 1 flooded property)  
 Studios and workshops  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
153 
  Porches  
 Garages which are an integral part of the house with adjoining door to the 
occupied building  
Buildings where the prime purpose is not for habitation or occupied business premises 
falls under external flooding.  
The list below gives examples of what should be included in the external flooding 
category:  
 buildings where the prime purpose is for storage or installatio n of domestic 
appliances and is not accessed from the house by means of an adjoining door to 
the habitable building.  
 detached garages (whether situated inside the boundary of the property and 
separated from the main building or outside the boundary but wi th common 
access as in a garage block). and  
 linked detached garages (i.e. garages which are attached to a property but 
separated from it by an external passageway).  
 sheds and outbuildings (e.g. stables, kennels, coal houses, outside toilets). 
summer hous es. and  
 swimming pools/heated external pools  
 temporary buildings  
Back flow of wastewater into sanitary ware and other appliances is classed as internal 
flooding in the following circumstances:  
 Wastewater back flow into sinks, showers and onto wet room floo rs. 
 Wastewater back flow into washing machines, dishwasher and other appliances.  
Back flow of wastewater in toilet bowls, which does not overspill the toilet bowl shall not 
be classed as flooding. Where the toilet overspills due to blockage and flushing mo re 
than once this shall not be classified as internal flooding.  
Restricted  Toilet  Use (RTU)  occurs  where  there  is no internal  flooding  but where  the 
customer   is unable  to flush  their toilet  without  a risk of causing  internal  flooding  of the 
property.  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
154 
  
1.8.2  External Sewer Flooding  
 
External flooding is defined as flooding which is not classed as internal. External areas 
is split into the following:  
 Curtilages flooding  
 Roads flooding, and.  
 Other External Areas flooding  
Examples of external flooding within the allocations are:  
“curtilage flooding” - any flooding (except internal flooding) within the curtilage of a 
residential building – this includes detached garages, linked detached garages, sheds, 
summer houses, swimmin g pools as these are not included in the definition of internal 
flooding.  
“Roads flooding” – including footpaths. and  
“Other External Areas flooding” - external flooding to the external areas of  non -
residential buildings and areas e.g. schools, offices,  commercial premises and public 
buildings. public open space. agricultural land. car parks.  
For “Other External Areas flooding” the external areas of offices, commercial premises, 
public buildings, car parks and agricultural land.  
2     GRAVITY SEWER DESIGN FLOWS  
2.1    Existing Networks  
 
The design of Existing Networks will be the responsibility of Irish Water or its Agents. 
The Developer’s designer will not be required to be involved in the design of existing 
Networks.   
2.2  Wastewater flows – New Networks  
The design parameters that are outlined below set out the design flow requirements in 
terms of growth, infiltration, peaking factors and misconnection allowances to ensure 
performance is maintained over the design life of the new wastewater collection system. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
155 
 Wastewater sewer capacity shall be designed with allowance for some possible surface 
water connection (misconnections), even where separate wastewater and surface water 
sewer networks exist. Allowance for the delayed flow from slow response run off due  to 
rainfall induced infiltration shall be ignored for the purpose of design of new wastewater 
sewers.  
Dry Weather Flow   = PG + I + E        
Design Foul Flow   = [ PfDom x PG] + [ Pf Dom, Ind  x P EGE ] + I +[ Pf Trade X E] (Eqn1)  
Design Flow   = [Eqn 1 ] + [SW + SW E]                           (Eqn 2) 
DWF    = Dry Weather Flow  
P   = Population  
G   = Water Consumption / Capita  
PE   = Commercial/Industrial Population  
GE    = Commercial / Industrial Water Consumption per Capita  
I   = Infiltration  
E   = Trade F low 
PfDom   = Peaking factor Domestic  
PfDom,Ind   = Peaking factor for Domestic element of  Industrial  
PfTrade    = Peaking factor for Trade Flow  
SW    = Surface Water Allowance (Domestic)  
SW E    = Surface Water Allowance (Commercial/Industrial)  
The wastewa ter network shall be designed to meet all of the following design flow 
scenarios:  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
156 
  
No.  Design  
 Flow Scenario  
Criteria   
Applicable 
Section  
  
Calculation  
Method  
1 Design Foul Flow  2.2 Eqn. 1  
2 Surcharge 
(Return Period ≤ 
2 years)  1.4 Eqn. 2  
or   
Surcharge 
(Return Period > 
2 years)  1.4 Eqn. 22  
4 Internal & 
External Flooding  1.1, 1.2 & 1 .3 Eqn. 23  
5 Low Flow – 
Minimum Velocity  1.6 Table 1.3 
Table 2.2: Design Flow Criteria  
2.2.1 Housing Density & O ccupancy  (P) 
 The following approach should be taken in determining Housing Density and 
Occupancy:  
 
 
 
                                                           
2 Peaking factors applied may be reduced based on review by IW  
3 Peaking factors applied may be reduced based on review by IW  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
157 
  Housing Density  
New Domestic Housing (known)  Housing Densities as per Lo cal 
Authority Development Plans . 
New  Domestic Housing 
(unknown)  Use 30 units/ha  
Existing Housing  Actual Housing Densities  
Table 2.3: Housing Density  
Population estimate shall be based on 2.7 persons per unit . 
2.2.2 Water Consumption (G)/Return to Sewer Flow  
 
For the basis of design the per capita (ca) water consumption shall be used to equate 
for general domestic wastewater flow contributions where site specific data is 
unavailable: Water Consumption (G) 0.15 m3/ca/day (i.e. 150 l/ca/day )  
2.2.3 Growth Rates  
Where applicable the design shall consider expected growth rates over the design  
horizon for the wastewater collection infrastructure. Growth rates may vary 
geographically depending on potential scale and location of future development that is 
anticipated.  
The application of growth rates shall be agreed with Irish Water prior to solu tion 
development.  
2.2.4 Infiltration ( I) 
Rates of infiltration vary greatly from agglomeration to sub -catchment level. Infiltration 
can be very high. This can be due to incorrect connection of land drainage to the 
wastewater sewerage system, high groundwater inflow into the sewerage system and 
deteriorated infrastructure giving rise to infiltration to the sewerage network from the IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
158 
 surrounding water table.  Infiltration should be determined where possible based on 
actual flow surveys/measurements due to the considerable variability across different  
networks. Due to seasonal variation survey/measurement should be preferably 
undertaken during winter months. The design of sewers in areas there is knowledge of 
high levels of infiltration shall be based on measured infiltration rates.  
Development4 Infilt ration Rates  
Existing Development  Rates obtained from measurement  
and/or  
evidenced by in -sewer survey  
Existing Property5 
[ without measurement or survey 
data]  20% of Unit Consumption  
(20% PG)  
New  Property  10% of Unit Consumption  
(10% PG)  
Existing Industrial6 
 
[ without measurement or survey 
data]  20% of Water Consumption  
(20% P EGE) 
 
New Industrial  10% of Water Consumption of the Industry  
(10% P EGE) 
Table 2.4: Infiltration Rates  
Design solutions for the wastewater network and flow quantities to WWTP should take 
account of the specific nature of the catchment.  At sites where infiltration (I) is recorded 
as greater than 200% of the domestic wastewater contribution (PG), the Designe r 
should undertake a Cost Benefit Analysis to demonstrate the best way to balance 
capital spend between network flow management (infiltration reduction) , the provision 
of hydraulic capacity in the sewer network and/or at the WWTPs. This analysis should 
                                                           
4 Infiltration Rates may be higher with deeper sewers or sewers that are near to watercourses or tidal areas due to 
hydrostatic head.  
5 Infiltration to be determined where possible based on flo w surveys/measurements  
6 Infiltration to be determined where possible based on flow surveys/measurements  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
159 
 take into account the ability of biological treatment process at the WWTP to treat very 
weak wastewater as well as the implications of high hydraulic loading of the wastewater 
treatment plant units and processes.  
2.2.5 Domestic Wastewater Peaking Factors  
For the design of new or upgraded wastewater networks, the peaking factors applied to 
domestic wastewater flows (Pf Dom) are to be in accordance with the Table below . Where 
the population overlaps two bands, a combination of the two peaking factors shall be 
used.  
Population  Peaking Factor  
(PfDom) 
0 to 750  6 
751 to 1,000  4.5 
1001 to 5,000  3.0 
5,001 to 10,000  2.5 
 
Table 2.5: Peaking Factor  
2.2.6 Domestic Wastewater Element of Commercial & Industrial Flows (P EGE ) 
 
For the design of new wastewater networks,  the rates for commercial wastewater flows 
are to be in accordance with the Table below:  
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
160 
 Element   
Flow Rates  
Existing Premises   
Based on flow rates on water consumption  
Known Population  of 
Commercial   
Flow rates per head from Appendix D . 
Known Domestic  
Population of Catchment   
Flow  rates for Light Commercial estimated as 
being 16% of Domestic Wastewater Flow Rates  
Unknown Population / 
Known Development Type   
Flow rates as per Appendix D below.  
Unknown Development 
Type   
0.15 l/s/ha of Gross Land Area  
Table 2.6: Domestic Element of Commercial & Industrial Flows  
2.2.7 Commercial Wastewater Peaking Factors  
For the design of new wastewater networks, the peaking factors applied to commercial 
wastewater flows are to be in accordance with the Table below:  
Area (ha)  Peaking Factor  
(PfDom,Ind ) 
0 - 5.5 4.5 
5.5 - 11 3.5 
11 - 22 3.0 
22 - 55 2.5 
> 55 2.0  
Table 2.7: Commercial Peaking Factors  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
161 
 2.2.8 Trade Wastewater Flows (E)  
Different wastewater flows will apply to industrial and commercial source contributions. 
In addition, tourist populations will have a varying effect. These loads can be obtained 
from Appendix D, below . In the absence of specific wastewater source contribut ions, 
the commercial/industrial trade wastewater flows may be taken from the Table below.  
Trade Flow Data  Flow Derivation  
Existing Trade Flows  From Trade (Section 16 Wastewater Licence or IPPC 
Licence)  
 Discharge Licences Values  
Proposed Trade Flows  Proposed Discharge Licences  
No available Data   
Dry Industry:    Low = 14: High = 20 (m3/ha/day)  
Wet Industry:           Low = 20: High = 42 (m3/ha/day)  
 
Table 2.8: Trade Flows  
2.2.9 Trade Wastewater Flow Peaking Factor  
For the design of new wastewater networks, the peaking factors applied to trade 
wastewater flows are to be in accordance with the Table below:  
Data  Factor (Pf Trade) 
 
Measured flow data or  
Peak Licenced Flow7 Most Onerous of Available Data  
 
No measured data  
 3.0 
Table 2.9: Trade Peaking Factor  
                                                           
7 Licenced flow may be much greater than measured flow - a review of historic measured flow v licence flow limit 
may be required to confirm likelihood of the allowable maximum licenced flow being discharged.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
162 
 2.2.10    Misconnection Allowance & Urban Creep  
2.2.10.1 Urban Creep  
Urban Creep is the loss of permeable area within urban areas creating increased run -off 
from new impermeable areas which contributes to reduced sewer capacity, increased 
potential flooding and occurrence of pollution incidents due to overflows from SWOs or 
hydraulic overloading of WWTPs.  Urban creep principally impacts combined sewers, 
storm water sewers and the downstream natural drainage systems. The UKWIR Report:  
“Impact of Urban  Creep On Sewerage Systems.  Report Ref. No. 10/WM/07/14” 
provides guidance on urban creep. It should be noted that urban creep tends to increase 
over time and may be negligible early on in the asset life.  
In areas served by combined sewer systems, the growth in impermeable area, or ‘ 
urban creep’, causes increases in surface water run -off being conveyed to the 
combined sewers and storm water sewers, thus reducing capacity, increasing frequency 
of storm water overflow spills and increasing the risk of se wer flooding.  
Allowance for urban creep shall be in accordance with Irish Water Guidance Note on 
the Application of Urban Creep Allowances and Misconnections for Future Scenarios in 
Wastewater Modelling.  
2.2.10 2   Misconnection Allowance  
Where there are separate wastewater and storm water sewer networks, the rainfall 
response in wastewater networks due to storm water inflow is principally caused by 
misconnections of storm water drains/sewers to the separate wastewater sewer, i.e. 
storm water drains being connected to the wastewater drain/sewer either unintentionally 
or intentionally as a convenient method of dealing with storm water runoff on premises. 
However, rainfall response can also be due to direct inflow through defective covers, or 
indirectly via r ainfall induced infiltration.  
Misconnections can occur at the outset of a new development due to poor construction 
practice either within the building, around the curtilage of the building or in the public 
road due to the connection of the service pipe or gully to the incorrect public sewer 
system, i.e. a storm water source being connected to a wastewater sewer system.  
The misconnection conveys storm surface water run -off from the impermeable area via 
the storm drain or sewer to the wastewater sewer. Rainfa ll response in wastewater 
sewers can be many multiples of orders of magnitude greater than wastewater flow. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
163 
 This increased inflow response can utilise significant capacity, can significantly reduce 
the design horizon and can cause pollution incidents and s ewer flooding.  
Most public wastewater sewers have misconnections and over time some wastewater 
sewers will exhibit flow response of partially separate sewers, i.e. a wastewater sewer 
which also carries some storm water flow. While removing the misconnectio n is 
preferred, finding and addressing the problem is not always feasible, even with 
extensive intrusive sewer surveys, CCTV surveys, flow & rainfall surveys, which will 
employ substantial resources and result in significant expenditure outlay. It is 
consi dered, therefore, far more cost -effective to minimise its occurrence in the first 
place.  
To preserve capacity in public wastewater sewers an increased flow allowance for 
misconnections should be provided for in the design of public sewers. This would also 
apply to new wastewater sewerage system of a certain scale in new developments that 
will be connected to public sewerage  systems.  
2.2 10.2.1   Misconnection Allowance Domestic (SW)  
The increased allowance for residential areas is outlined in the Table her eunder:  
  
Allowance  
(SW)  
Impermeable survey and /or flow 
survey data, existing area   
Use areas derived from surveys  
Where no data is available for 
existing areas and for New 
Development areas   
3.0% of Gross Site Area.  
 
Existing Combined Sewer Area   
Use areas derived from surveys  
Table 2.10: Misconnection Allowance Residential Areas  
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
164 
 2.2.10.2.2   Misconnection Allowance in Commercial & Industrial Foul Flows (SWe)  
The increased allowance for commercial/industrial areas is outlined in the Table 
hereunder:  
 Allowance  
(SW E) 
Impermeable survey and /or flow 
survey data, existing areas   
Use areas derived from survey  
Where no data for existing areas 
and for new areas   
2.0% of Gross Site Area.  
 
Table 2.11: Misconnection Allowance Commercial/Industrial Areas  
2.2 11  Surface Water Flows  
As a general guide, the hydraulic flow load arising from storm water impacting on the 
capacity of the wastewater sewerage systems should be based on the Design Method 
outlined in the Table below as fo llows:  
Development Size   
Method of Design 8 
Small Development (<150 ha)  Modified Rational Method  
Large New Development (>150 ha)  Modified Rational Method9 or 
Hydraulic Simulation (Preferred)  
Existing Networks  Hydraulic Simulation  
 
Table 2.12: Method of Design  
                                                           
8 Where connections are to be made to an existing combined system, computer simulation using a hydraulic model 
shall be undertaken with a model built in accordance with the IW Wastewater Network Hydr aulic Model Build and 
Verification Standard ( IW-TEC-800-06) 
9 Where pipes will have less than 1.0m cover the need for Computer Simulation shall be considered to check the 
adequacy of the design against flood risk.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
165 
 The Modified Rational Method is detailed in Volume 4 of the Wallingford Procedure and 
a summary of it is outlined below. The Modified Rational Method was developed as part 
of the Wallingford procedure. It is used to derive a peak flow rate and then this is used 
to select a pipe size based on pipe -full flow.  The Modified Rational method equation to 
determine peak flow rates is: Q = 2.78 C Ai.  Where:  
Q = design event peak rate of runoff (I/s)  
A  =  contributing area (ha)  
C = non-dimensional runoff coe fficient which is dependent on the   
 catchment characteristics  
i  =  rainfall intensity for the design return period (in mm/hr) and for a   
 duration equal to the “time of concentration” of the network.  
Note: 2.78 is a conversion factor to address the rai nfall unit being in mm/hr  
2.2.12 Contributing Area (A)  
 
Surface Type   
Impermeability  
Roofs, roads and paved areas   
100%  
Other areas   
Nil10 
 
Table 2.13: Imperm eablility of Contributing Areas (A)  
2.2.13 Rainfall Intensity (i)  
 
For selection of the appropriate rainfall return period and rainfall intensity refer to 
Appendix B - Section 1. 
 
                                                           
10 Where appropriate, allowance should be made for run -off from exposed rock surfaces, derelict land and/or run -
off from saturated non -hard surfaces (following prolonged wet weather).  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
166 
 2.2.14  Time of Entry 
 
Return Period  Subcatchment  
<200m2, Slope > 
3% Subcatchment  
>400m2, Slope < 
2% 
1 year  4 min  8 min  
2 years  4 min  7 min  
5 years  3 min  
 6 min  
>5 years  3 min  3 min  
 
Table 2.14:  Time of Entry  
2.2 15  Time of Flow  
 
The time of flow is the time taken for flow at the point of entry to reach a particular point 
(the design point) in a sewer. The velocity of the flow in the sewers can be calculated 
from the hydraulic properties of the pipe based on Colebrook White equation. Pipe -full 
velocity is normally used as a good approximation over a range of proportional depths. 
If sewer length is known or assumed, time of flow can be calculated.  
2.2.16  Time of Concentration  
 
The time of concentration is the time taken for runoff from the most distant part in terms 
of travel time of the catchment to reach a particular point (the design point) in the sewer. 
The Time of Concentration being the summation of the Time of Entry and the Time of 
Flow.  
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
167 
 2.2.17 Dimensionless Co efficient (C)  
Dimensionless Coefficient (C)11: 
C = C VCR 
CV = Volumetric Run -off Coefficient  
CR = Routing Coefficient  
Soil Type /Surface Quality   
CV 
  
CR 
Rapid draining soils /low quality surface   
0.6 
 1.3 
Heavy soils / high quality surface  0.9   
1.3 
 
Table 2.15: Run Off and Routing Coefficient  
2.2.18  Design Rainfall  
 
The design rainfall storm used in the modelling process shall be in accordance with 
guidance provided  in ‘Guidance on Rainfall for Wastewater Modelling in Ireland, H.R. 
Wallingford, February 2017 ’. this guidance addresses the following topics:  
 Areal Reduction Factor  
 Seasonal Correction Factor  
 Parameters in the New UK Runoff Equation  
 FSU Rainfall Data  
 Time  Series Rainfall  
 Climate Change  
 
                                                           
11 A value of C= 1.0 is suggested for most circumstances but where there ar e large areas of connected impervious 
area and soil type and/or condition of the surface is considered to be a factor C v may be adjusted as indicated to 
calculate C.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
168 
 2.2 Land Drainage, Run -Off from Permeable Areas & Derelict Land  
Land drainage flows shall not be connected into wastewater, or combined drains or 
sewers.  
It is a matter for the Local Authority of the area as to whether it would allow land 
drainage flows to be discharged into the storm water sewerage that is under its control. 
The method of design, in that instance, will be dictated by the Local Authority.  
The existence of flows in existing sewers that convey land drainage shall be assessed 
in terms of available head and governing topography. When assessing the capacity of 
the connected existing land drainage systems care shall be taken to use appropriate 
roughness values. For small streams and ditches flow estimation shall be in accordance 
with the Flood Studies Update (FSU) by the Office of Public Works (OPW).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
169 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C   
 
Wastewater Flow Rates for Design   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
170 
 Flow Rates for Design  
 
Per person / activity / day (unless otherwise specified)  FLOW  
(Litres)  
DOMESTIC DWELLINGS    
Standard residential   150 
Mobile home type caravans with full services   150 
INDUSTRIAL   
Office / Factory without canteen  50 
Office / Factory with canteen  100 
Open industrial site, e.g. construction, quarry, without canteen  
  60 
*Full-time Day Staff  90 
*Part -time Staff (4 hr shift)    45 
SCHOOLS   
Non-residential with canteen cooking on site    90 
Non-residential without a canteen   50 
Boarding school  (i) residents   175 
Boarding school   (ii) day staff (inc luding  mid-day meal)  90 
HOTELS, PUBS & CLUBS   
Hotel Guests  250 
Residential Training/Conference Guest  (inclusive all meals)   350 
Non residential Conference Guest   60 
Public House  Patrons  12 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
171 
 Holiday Camp Chalet Residents  227 
Resident Staff  180 
Restaurants   - Full Meals  30 
Restaurants    - pre-prepared catering   25 
Restaurants   - Snack Bars & bar meals   15 
Restaurants   - Function Rooms including buffets   15 
Restaurants   - Fast Food i.e. (roadside restaurants)  12 
Restaurants   - Fast Food Meal (burger chain and similar)   12 
Students (Accommodation only)  100 
AMENITY SITES   
Toilet Blocks (per use)  10 
Toilet (WC) (per use)  10 
Toilet (Urinal) (per use)   5 
Toilet Blocks in long stay car parks/lorry parks (per use)   10 
Shower (per use)    40 
Golf Club  20 
Local community sports club, e.g. squash, rugby & football    40 
Swimming (where a separate pool exists without an associated 
sports centre)   10 
Health Club/Sports Centre    50 
Tent Sites  75 
Caravan Sites  (i) Touring not serviced   100 
Caravan Sites  (ii) Static not serviced  100 
Caravan Sites  (iii) Static fully serviced  150 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
172 
 HOSPITALS & RESIDENTIAL CARE HOMES   
Residential old people / nursing  350 
Small Hospitals  450 
Large Hospitals  Assess 
Individually  
*Staff figures also apply to other applications  
  
 
Where the Table above does not include flow rates for the type of activity, the t rade 
wastewater flow should be based on the EPA Wastewater Treatment Manuals – 
Treatment Systems for Small Communities, Business, Leisure Centres and Hotels 
(1999) or on a metered water supply from Premises similar to that of the proposed 
development . If the t rade wastewater flow is still unknown, appropriate flow rates should 
be chose n from Section 2.2.8 of Appendix B.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
173 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D  
 
Amendments Associated with change from  
Revision 1 (December 2017) to Revision 2 ( July 2020)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
174 
 Amendment 
Location  Description of Change for Revision  2  
General 
Amendments  The Code of Practice has been amended in a significant number of 
areas. These amendments are listed below in relation to the 
location of the amendment ( Section, Sub -Section , etc.). There are 
a number of amendments arising from high level changes and 
these are referred to a “General Amendments” as opposed to 
“particular amendments”.   
 
A general amendment is applied t o align the terminology within the 
Code of Practice with th e terminology used in the Self -lay 
Connection Agreement where applicable. Examples of this are 
listed below and examples are as follows:  
 “development(s)” is changed to “Development(s)” as this is 
a defined term.  
 “Customer” has been changed to “Developer”.  
 A new term of “Water and Wastewater Services 
Infrastructure” has been included.  
 A new term of “ Self-Lay Works” has been included.  
 Etc. 
 
As a consequence, minor amendments are included in many 
Sections to reflect new defined terms. It is not deemed necessar y 
to list all of the Sections and Sub -Section affected by the 
terminology changes as these changes are non material in most 
instances.  
 
Other general amendments relate to the following:  
 
- The use of IS 420 and IS EN 1917 as standards for pre -cast 
concrete manhole units,  
- An amended specification for the bedding of chamber cover 
frames seated with rapid hardening cementitious, epoxy or 
polyester resin mortar, with a minimum working time of 15 
minutes, a minimum compressive strength of 30 N/mm2 and 5 
N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing.  
- An amendment specifying the bedding and setting  mortar for 
Class B engineering brick  under chamber covers/frames 
should be of  minimum M30 strength mortar to IS EN 998 – 
Part 2.  
- Changes to IW maintenance responsibility,  
- Standard for compliance of PE Pipe joints revised,  
- Sampling and testing of PE pipes updated,  
- Specification for pipe surround and bedding material amended 
to reflect IS EN 13242 requirements for 14 to 5mm (d/D 2/14) 
and 10mm (d/D 4/10),  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
175 
 - Revised requireme nt for protection of shallow depth pipework,  
- Requirements for torque blocks revised,  
- Clarification on telemetry requirements,  
- Amendments for PE Auditing/Standards and Test Acceptance.  
 
The particular changes to the various Sections and Sub -Sections 
of the Code of Practice are outlined below in this list of 
amendments.     
Particular 
Amendments  Description of Change for Revision 2  
Background  Minor changes have been included as well as an amendment to 
the 4th to change “should” to “shall” in the 2nd sentence.  
Table of 
Contents  Sections 1.9.1 to 1.9.3 have been included.  
Section 3.12, Manholes, has been expanded to list the Sub -Section 
3.12.1 to 3.12.11.  
Section 3.17.4 has been retitled to read “Wastewater Air Valve”.  
Section 3.26, Warning Tape, and Section 3.27, Indicator Marker 
Plates and Posts, have been included.  
New Sections have been included in part 5 Pumping Stations, i.e. 
Section 5.17 to Section 5.21, Section 5.23 to Section 5.27 and 
Section 5.32.   
Previous Appendix B , “Selection of Typical Standard Details”  ahs 
been omitted. . 
Previous Appendix C, “Gravity Sewer Design Requirements” has 
been changed to Appendix B and expanded. . 
Previous Appendix D , “Wastewater Flow Rates for Design ” has 
been changed to “Appendix C” . 
Appendix D List of Amendments Associated with Revision 2 has 
been included  
Glossary of 
Terms and 
Definitions  New definitions for the following have been included:  
  
“Building Regulations”, “Business Day”, “Connection Application”, 
“Connection Point(s)”, “ Connection Works”, “Construction 
Regulations”, “Developer”, “Developments”, “Network(s)”, “PRA 
Compliant Map”, “Relevant Standards”, “Self -Lay Works”, “Sewage 
and Sewage Effluent”, “Water and Wastewater Services 
Infrastructure”,  
 
Revised  definition of the following have been included:  
 
“Backfill” , “Boundary”, “Completion Certificate”, “Conformance 
Certificate” , “Connection Offer”, “Connection Works”, “Customer”, 
Curtilage”, “Deed of Grant of Easement”, “Irish Water”, “Local 
Authority”, “Manhole”, “Premises”, “Security”, “Service Connection”, 
“Trade Effluent”, “Wastewater”, “Wastewater Connection Point”, 
and “Works”.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
176 
 Section 1.1  The 1st sentence has been amended to outline what the “Works” 
covers. Two new paragraph s have been included at the end o f the 
Section.   
Section 1.2  Minor changes made to the 2nd paragraph making reference to 
“Bord Gais” and the “Commission of Regulation of Utilities”.  
Section 1.4  Amendment to Section 1.4.1 to clarify that a Pre -connection 
Enquiry is mandatory for Developments using the planning 
procedures of the Strategic Housing Development Regulations.   
Section 1. 5  Minor text changes made to refer to new defined terms.  
Section 1.7  Amendments have been include d to reflect t hat Irish Water is 
responsible for the maintenance of the wastewater service 
connection in public areas and Figure 1 has been amended 
accordingly.    
Section 1.8  Amendments as follows:  
- 2nd paragraph has bee n amended to refer to the “Quality 
Assurance Field Inspection Requirements” Manual.  
- Additional paragraph included after Sub -Section 1.8.2 to 
indicate that the issuing of the Conformance Certificate marks 
the commencement of the Defects L iability Period.  
- Sub-Sections 1. 8.3, 1. 8.4 and 1. 8.5 amended to require the 
Chartered Engineer confirmation to be provided in writing.  
- Minor amendment to Sub -Section 1.8.7.  
-  Sub-section 1.8.9 to expand the information to be included in 
Operation and Maintenance Manual of Pump Stations.  
- Minor amendment to Sub -Section 1.8.10.  
- Sub-Section 1.8.14.2 amended to change the accurac y 
tolerance to +/ - 40mm.  
- Additional paragraph s included at end of Section requiring the 
submission of details of the Storm Water Collection System  to 
IW. In the case of Storm Water connections to IW’s Networks, a 
Conformance Certificate will not be issued unless details of the 
Storm Water system is submitt ed with the Final Documents.   
Section 1.9  Amended as follows:  
- Amended r equirements for Asset Naming included.  
- Amended requirements for CCTV Video Files included.  
- Amended requirements for Sewer Record Information included.  
- Amended requirements for Recording and Deliverables 
included.  
- Section 1.9.3 has been expanded to require information on 
“Sewer Record Information” and “Channel Layout Orientation”.   
Section 1.10  Amended to indicate that an additional CCTV survey may be 
required following the completion of remedial works. Amended 
included to require corrections to be addressed by the Developer 
within a reasonable timeframe in advance of the connection being 
made .  
Section 1.11  Amended as follows:  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
177 
 - New sentence included at  end of 1st paragraph  indication that 
Irish water will undertake investigation of the Works during the 
Defects Liability Period.  
- Clarification provided in second paragraph in relation to 
development of subsequent phases of an overall Development.  
Section  1.12 Minor amendments to reflect new defined terms. Last paragraph 
amended to indicate that the Developer is responsible for the 
operation and maintenance of the infrastructure until the end of the 
Defects Liability Period.    
Section 1.13  Minor amendments to reflect new defined terms.  
Section 1.14  Minor amendments to reflect new defined terms.  
Section 1.15  Minor amendments to reflect new defined terms. The 2nd paragraph 
is amended to indicate that the cost of additional CCTV surveys 
and investi gations to identify defects will be carried by the 
Developer.  
Section 1.17  Amended to indicate that the liaison with the Fire Officer is to be 
submitted in the Design Submission.   
Section 1.19  The 3rd paragraph has been amended in respect of the use of 
newly developed products and indicating that Irish water is not 
obliged to accept such products.  
Section 2.1  Amendment of the 2nd paragraph to indicate that the Developer’s 
designer is to be competent.   
Section 2.2  Amendment of the 2nd paragraph to in relation to the continued 
responsibility of the Developer’s designer  and the retention of 
Professional Indemnity Insurance for a period of 6 years after the 
issue of the Completion Certificate.   
Section 2.3  Amended as follows:  
- Sub-Section 2.3.13 expanded to require the submission of Fire 
Authority approvals for the development.  
- Sub-Section 2.3.17 expanded to required identification of the 
manufacturers of pipelines and accessory materials.  
- A new  Sub-Section 2.3.18 included to require the submission 
of certification of fittings and materials used in the Works.  
- Section 2.3.22 expanded to require a report on separation 
distances.  
- New Section 2.3.26 included to require the submission of 
information w here construction of the Works is to be carried 
out on made ground , engineered ground or in fill zones  and 
the submission of geotechnical reports and method statements 
for the construction of the Works.  
- New Sub -Section 2.3.27 requiring the submission of a Flood 
Risk Assessment confirming compliance with Section 5.5 of 
the Code of Practice  along with layout plans of where these 
occur and method statements for construction.    
- New Sub -Section 2.3.28 requiring the submission of anti -
floatation calculations for pump station structures.   IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
178 
 Section 2.4  Amended as follows:  
- The 3rd paragraph has been amended to indicate revised 
arrangements for the submission of drawings.   
- Sub-section 2.4.2 expanded to require the submission of an 
overall development plan layout of  the units intended to be 
constructed and delivered in phases indicating phase lines and 
control breaks  
- Sub-Section 2. 4.4 expanded to require the submission  of 
information of above ground structures that rae to be vested by 
Irish Water  
- Sub-Section 2.4.6 expanded to require the submission of details 
of existing services crossing the Works and details of thrust 
blocks, etc.  
- Sub-Section 2.4.8 expanded to require the submission of details 
made ground, engineered ground or fill zones .  
- The seventh paragraph has been expanded to require the  
submission of manufacturer’s data sheets and certificates for 
the long with the schedule of materials required for the 
proposed Works . . 
Section 2.5  Amended as follows:  
- 1st paragraph amended to require submission of hydraulic 
models for developments of more that 330 units.  
- A new 2nd paragraph included to require the submission of a 
hydraulic model of all Storm Sewer systems in new 
developments where intended to be connected  to the Irish 
Water combined sewer system.  
- The 3rd paragraph has been amended likewise.  
- The last paragraph is amended to facilitate Irish Water’s 
observations of the verification of “as -constructed” hydraulic 
models.  
Section 3.1  The 1st paragraph is expanded to require compliance with the 
Standard Details as well as Codes of Practice. Sub -Section 3.1.3 
expanded and reference made  to compliance with Appendix C.  
Section 3.2  The word “should” has been replaced with “shall” in the first 
sentence.  
Section 3.3  Amended as follows:  
- A new 1st paragraph has been included to require the Developer 
to be responsible for the provision of all materials and to have 
an auditable system in place to trace these materials.  
- Sub-section 3.3.2 expanded to  qualify what is meant by 
“watertight”.  
- New Sub -Section 3.3.5 requiring that the Works do not have a 
negative impact on the environment.   
Section 3.4  Amended as follows:  
- Sub-Section 3.4.4 amended to outline a range of protection 
measures for pipes installed at shallow depths.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
179 
 - New Sub -Section 3.4.8 requiring the Works to be watertight.  
- New Sub -Clause 3.4.9 requiring that no trees or large shrubs be 
located over the Works.  
Section 3.5   Amended as follows:  
- Sub-Section 3 .5.2 expanded to include location of infrastructure 
is separated from trees, shrubs, also.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.3 expanded to include renewal, replacement 
and upgrading,  
- Sub-Clause 3.5.5 expanded to indicate that the infrastructure 
can be safely accessed.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.6 expanded to require service connection 
lengths to be minimised.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.7 clarified.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.8 expanded to outline the maximum distances 
between manholes for 150mm sewers an d for 225mm and 
greater sewer sizes (clarification).  
- Sub-Section 3.5.9 has been amended to outline clarification on 
separation distances between new sew ers and existing/new 
structures , with the guidance now limited to 375mm diameter 
pipework. Specific gui dance from IW is required for 
infrastructure above these limits.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.10 amended to replace “should” with “shall”.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.11 amended to replace “should” with “shall” 
and to require infrastructure location in public areas, or areas to 
become public, where possible.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.12 amended to replace “should” with “shall” in 
relation to pipes being in straight lined between manholes  and 
to indicate that 45 deg. long radius bends are allowed on 
service connections  to transition from horizontal to vertical to the 
connection point . 
- A new Sub -Section 3.5.13 included to outline requirements for 
profiling manhole benching to direct inlet flows smoothly to the 
outlet.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.14 amended to replace “should” with “shall” in 
relation to staggering of storm and wastewater manholes and to 
ensure clear separation between the manhole structures and 
the pipework.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.15 amended to replace “should” with “shall” in 
relation to the coincidental design of asset i nfrastructure and 
landscaping.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.16 amended to clarify separation distances and 
to refer to Sub -Section 3.5.9.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.17 amended to clarify requirements in relation 
to installing sewerage works crossing over and under existing 
water mains.  
- A new Sub -Section 3.5.19 included in relation to separation IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
180 
 distances for wastewater service connections.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.20 amended to outline revised horizontal 
separation distances from the pipe external face  for Gravity 
Sewers/Rising Mains to other infrastructure.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.22 reinforces the need for the provision of 
Deeds of Grant of Easements.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.23 outlines requirements for rising main 
profiles, straight lines or gentle curves, in accor dance with 
manufacturer requirements.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.24 amended to outline requirements in relation 
to the provision of rodding points on rising mains.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.25 amended to replace “should” with “shall” in 
relation to rising mains being evenly graded, and if not possible, 
requiring the provision of air valves, or scour valves, complete 
with marker plates.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.26 amended to outline requirements for the 
ease of pigging, scouring, rodding and cleaning of rising mains.  
- Sub-Section 3.5. 27 amended to require inclusion of marker 
plates associated with fittings for rising mains.  
- Sub-Section 3.5.28 amended to reinforce the need for a trace 
wire in marker tape for rising mains  and indicating the colour of 
the marker tape .  
- A new Table and te xt is included at the end of Section 3.5 to 
clarify requirements for vertical separation distances for 
wastewater service connections in trafficked and non -trafficked 
areas as set out in Sub -Section 3.5.19.   
Section 3.6  Section  3.6 has been significantly amended in relation to the 
design of Gravity Sewers and it refers to Appendix B, Gravity 
Sewer Design. Criteria have now been included to obviate the 
need for a full design to be undertaken in the case where proposed 
sewer infra structure complies with pipe sizes shown in the Table 
(Sewer Size/Gradient for Multiple Properties). Section 3.6 has also 
been expanded to include maximum pipe gradients for different 
size sewers and a Table (Maximum sewer gradients) has been 
included in r elation to this.   
Section 3.7  Amended as follows:  
- Section 3.7 has been amended to include “shall” instead of 
“should” in advan ce of all of the Sub -Sections.  
- Sub-Section 3.7.9 has been amended to include a separation 
distance of 200m between rodding points instead of 500m.  
- Sub-Section 3.7.14 has been amended to exclude the use of 
saddle connections at connection points and required the 
provision of Y branch connections.  
- A new Sub -Section 3.7.15 has been included to refer back to 
Sub-Section 3.5.25 in relation to scouring requirements for 
rising mains. .  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
181 
 Section 3. 9 Amended to clarify a hierarchy of protection measures for sewers 
at that are proposed w here depths are not in accordance with Sub -
Section 3.9.1 to Sub -Section 3.9.6. In addition, an absolute 
minimum depth of cover of 500mm in un -trafficked areas and 
750mm in trafficked areas is now required when protection 
measures are used.  
Section 3.1 1  Amended as follows:  
- The 1st paragraph has be en amended to clarify that Sewers are 
accessed by either manholes generally and access chambers 
where the sewer is of small size and shallow depth, with the 
size of public side access chamber nominated (900mm by 
900mm).  
- Sub-Section 3.1 1.3 amended to included “opening” after 
“access”.  
- Sub-Section 3.11.4 amended to outline the internal dimensions 
of an access shaft.  
- A new Sub -Section 3.11.5 included to describe the requirement 
for a smooth flow invert/channel.  
- Sub-Section 3.11.14 amende d to outline the requirement for a 
private side inspection chamber  and that plastic approved 
proprietary chambers may be used .  
- Sub-Section 3.11.15 has been qualified to indicate that the 
renewal, maintenance and repair of Drains and associated 
access accessories upstream of the boundary of the Premises 
is the responsibility of the property owner.  
- Additional requirements are provi ded at the end of Section 3.11 
dealing with requirements for the private side inspection 
chamber as well as issues in relation to their location, size, their 
reduction in size in confined spaces, their location in high 
density developments , etc. , and flexi bility that will be allowed in 
these situations . 
Section 3.12  Amended as follows:  
- The 2nd paragraph amended to include the dimensions of public 
side head  inspection chamber.  
- The 3rd paragraph amended to include inspection chambers.  
- The 4th paragraph has been amended in  relation to locating 
manholes and inspection chambers in high use carriageways.  
- The 6th paragraph has been amended to require the provision of 
safe access around the manhole and inspection chamber.  
- The 7th paragraph has bee n amended to outline the 
requirements for a backdrop manhole and conditions where a 
cascade manhole would be acceptable.  
- Sub-Section 3.12.1.5 has been amended to clarify and expand 
where the u se of pre -cast manhole units  are not allowed, i.e. 
where the wa ter table is high or where there is a perched water 
table, where the manhole is located near a river, lake or water IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
182 body, etc. Additional requirements are included also on the 
depth of pre -cast roof slabs, base units, etc.  It is also required 
that the omis sion of the concrete surround is only allowed up to 
a maximum depth of 4.0m. In addition, the omission of the 
concrete surround shall only apply if the wall unit is not 
penetrated through with proprietary fixings which could result in 
the water tightness o f the unit being compromised.  
-Sub-Section 3.12.1.6 has been amended to outline
requirements for blockwork manholes, strength of block, mortar,
etc.
-Sub-Section 3.12.2 (Manhole Dimensions) has been amended
in relation to the listed “minimum” manhole sizes  and the need
for increased dimensions to accommodate bends, multiple
inlets, etc.
-Sub-Section 3.12.3 (Manhole Bases) has been amended to
include for the provision of a 75mm depth of concrete blinding
layer under the base. The minimum thickness of a pre -cast base
beneath the channel invert is set at 150mm.
-Sub-Section 3.12.4 (Manhole Walls) is amended to outline the
requirements for use of cast -in-situ manholes in areas where
the water table is high or likely to be high. Pre -cast manholes
units are to be in accordance with IS 420 and IS EN 1917. The
bedding mortar for blockwork is also outlined. It is also required
that the omission of the concrete surround is only allowed up to
a maximum depth of 4.0m. In addition, the omission of the
concrete surround sh all only apply if the wall unit is not
penetrated through with proprietary fixings which could result in
the water tightness of the unit being compromised .
-Sub-Section 3.12.5 (Manhole Roofs) is amended to require pre -
cast manholes units are to be in accordance with IS 420 and IS
EN 1917.
-Sub-Section 3.12.6 title has been amended to read “Manhole
Invert and Benching” and has also been amended to address
the blanking of redundant channels in pre -cast bases.
-Sub-Section 3.12.7 (Manhole Shaft) is amended  to require pre -
cast manholes units are to be in accordance with IS 420 and IS
EN 1917 .
-Sub-Section 3.12 .8 (Rocker Pipes) is amended to limit the
description of rocker pipes to the size of Works covered by the
Code of Practice,
-Sub-Section 3.12.9 (Manhole  Covers and Frames) amended to
indicate that a 600mm clear opening is required (600mm square
or circular). A clarification on the number of keyways is provided
for double triangular covers. A description of the requirement for
hinged covers is provided. The width of the engineering brick
beneath the frame is to be 215mm.  Revised requirements areIW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
183 
 provided for the bedding and seating the frames and for the 
bedding of the brickwork under the frames.  
- Sub-Section 3.12.10 (Manhole Steps) is clarified in relation  to 
the depth of chambers where steps are allowed.  
- Sub-Section 3.12.11 (Ladders) has been amended outlining that 
manholes in excess of 6m deep shall require a detailed design 
submission to Irish Water.  Clarification is provided on the 
thickness of galvani sing for ladders, complying with IS EN ISO 
1461, with at lease 100 micron galvanise thickness.   
Section 3.13  Amended as follows:  
- Sub-Section 3.13.2 (Thermoplastic Structured Wall Pipes) 
fittings may be supplied with a Stiffness Class 4kN/m2 (SN4) 
complying with IS EN  13476.  
- Sub-Section 3.13.3 (Unplasticised PVC) fittings may be supplied 
with a Stiffness Class 4kN/m2 (SN4) complying with IS EN1 401.  
Section 3.15  Amended as follows:  
- The first paragraph is amended to indicate that a “branch 
connection” is required rather than a “saddle connection”.  
- The 2nd paragraph has been amended to require the provision 
of a rocker pipe assembly connection between the rising main 
and the header manhole.  
- The header chamber to be provided with a sealed man hole 
cover and frame.  
- The vent stack to be fitted with a passive activated carbon unit 
in all cases.  
Section 3.16  Significant changes have been carried out to Section 3.16. These 
are generally covering the following:  
- The Section has been sub -divided into Sub -Sections.  
- Revised Standards and requirements have been included in 
Sub-Section 3. 16.1 for fusion welding, welding equipment, etc.  
- Revised requirement are included in Sub-Section 3. 16.2 for 
jointing of polyethylen e pipes . 
- Revised requirement are included in Sub-Section 3. 16.3 for 
auditing and testing of polyethylene pipe joints.  
- Additional requirement are included in Sub-Section 3. 16.4 for 
jointing of polyethylene pipe coils.   
Section 3.17  Amended as follows:  
-  3rd paragraph of Sub-Section 3.1 7.2 has been amended to set 
limits (max and min) for the location of the sluice valve  stem  
cap. 
- Sub-Section 3.1 7.4 title has been amended to “Wastewater Air 
Valve”.  
- Sub-Section 3.1 7.4 has also been amended to allow greater 
flexibility for the use of non -metallic pipework.  
- Sub-Section 3.1 7.5 included Standards for flange adaptor end 
restraints for polyethylene in the 5th and 6th paragraphs.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
184 
 Section 3.18  Amende d as follows:  
- All chamber cover/frames to be bedded with rapid hardening 
cementitious, epoxy or polyester resin mortar, with a minimum 
working time of 15 minutes, a minimum compressive strength of 
30 N/mm2 and 5 N/mm2 within 3 hours of mixing.  
- All chambers cover/frames to be seated on Class B engineering 
brick in min imum M30 strength mortar to IS EN 998 – Part 2.  
- Sub-Section 3.1 8.1, 3rd paragraph, is amended to allow the use 
of pre -cast concrete floor slabs . Free draining granular material 
is required beneath the d rain hole in the base slab to allow free 
drainage of l iquid from the chamber.  The 4th paragraph is 
amended to refer to TII Specification, instead of the NRA 
Specification.  
- Sub-Section 3.1 8.2, 3rd paragraph, is amended to allow the use 
of precast roof slab units to IS 420 and IS EN 1917. The 4th 
paragraph has been amended in relation to the seating of the 
cover and frame and the requirement for bricks and bedding 
mortar are clarified, as outlined above.  
- Sub-Section 3.18.3, 5th paragraph, has been amended to outline 
as specification for the seati ng of manhole frames, support 
bricks, bedding mortar, etc. as outlined above.  
Section 3. 20  Amende d as follows:  
- The title of the section has been amended to “Working Near 
Existing Pipes (Notifications and Separation Distances”  
- 1st paragraph amended to indicate that works in the vicinity of 
Irish Water assets of 400mm diameter and more require written 
agreement from the utility  prior to undertaking the work . 
- 2nd paragraph amended to limit the application of Sub -Section 
3.20.1 to 3.2 0.8 to situations where the asset is not exceeding 
1.5m deep.  
- 3rd paragraph amended to require specific written agreement in 
relation to assets greater than 1.5m deep or where the 
separation distances are less than set out in Sub -Section 3.20.1 
to 3.20.8.  
- A new paragraph (4th paragraph) is included to require minimum 
separation distances as outlined in Section 3.5.18 and Section 
3.5.19.    
- Sub-Section 3.20.9 to Sub -Section 3.20.11 amended to include 
“pipe” rather than “main”.   
Section 3.21  The acronyms in the first paragraph are expanded.  
Section 3.22  Amended to call in to play the conditions of the Trade Effluent 
Licence. In addition, it is indicated that the use of degreasing 
agents and enzymes is not permitted.  
Section 3.23  Amended to outline the requirement for compliance with conditions 
in the Trade Effluent Licence.  
Section 3.26  A new Section is included outlining the requirements for Warning IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
185 
 Tape when installing Sewers and Rising Mains.  
Section 3.27   A new Section is included outlining the requirements for Indicator 
Plates and Posts for fittings associated with Rising Mains.  
Section 4.1   Amended as follows:  
- The 3rd paragraph is amended to call in the requirements of the 
Code of Practice.  
- The 3rd paragraph is expanded. Item (f) is included requiring 
protection of the environment.  
- The term “leak tight” is explained as passing the requirement of 
Section 4.10, Testing of Gravity Sewers and Manholes.  
Section 4.2  The 4th paragraph is expanded to require pipes and fittings to be 
kept clear of fuel oils and any material that might contaminate the 
material.  
Section 4.3  Expanded to require the use of trial holes to locate existing 
services.  
Section 4.5  Transport Infrastructure Ireland is nominated instead of National 
Roads Authority.  
Section 4.7  Amended as follows:  
- The 1st paragraph has been amended to nominate pipe bedding 
and surround material in accordance with the nominations in IS 
EN 13242.  
- The 2nd paragraph is expanded to describe the fill below the 
pipe invert in the event that over excavation is required in 
trenches with rock formation.  
- The 5th paragraph is clarified to in relation to the requirement to 
granular surround for both rigid and fl exible pipes.  
- The 6th paragraph is amended to include a clarification for the 
backfill material required in trenches along green field areas, 
“acceptable material” in accordance with the TII’s Specification 
for Roadworks.  
- New requirements (8th and 9th paragraphs) are included to 
outline protection measures for pipes that do not have the 
required depth of cover.  
- The 10th paragraph is amended to indicate the thickness of the 
pipe concrete, 150mm.  
- A new 11th paragraph is included to describe the protectio n 
measure relating to the provision of ductile iron pipe where the 
depth of cover is inadequate.  
- The last paragraph is amended to call out Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland is nominated instead of National Roads 
Authority.   
Section 4.8  Amendments have been included in 3rd paragraph which allow 
alternative Backfill material, other than Clause 804 and Clause 808 
granular material, to be used in pipe trenches within developments 
subject to a written statement from the Roads Authority of the  
functional area where the development is located being made IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
186 
 available to Irish Water in the Design Submission. This is to 
comprise “acceptable material” in accordance with Clause 601 of 
the TII “Specification for Roadworks, Series 600 – Earthworks”, 
Table  6/1 and the Local Authority is to clearly nominate the Class 
of “acceptable material” in the written approval.  Amendments 
included in 7th paragraph outlining a specification for Backfill 
material in green field areas.   
Clause 4.9  Amendments are included as follows:  
- The 1st sentence of the 3rd paragraph has been amended to 
replace “The blocks” with “Anchor and support blocks”.  
- The 3rd sentence of the 3rd paragraph is amended to indicate 
that thrust blocks are required for bends of 11.25 deg. and 
greater.   
The last sentence of the 3rd paragraph has bene expanded to 
indicate that compressible filler board  and plastic sheeting is 
required around polyethylene pipes cast against the concrete of 
thrust and anchor blocks.  
- The 4th paragraph is clarified i n relation to the provision of 
torque blocks.  
- The 6th paragraph is clarified in relation to the provision of 
information by the Developer when specialised pipe support 
systems are proposed.  
- The last paragraph is amended to outline that anchorage for 
fully integrated PE pipe systems may not require anchorage 
supports.  
- The last paragraph has been further expanded to indicate that 
where supports are required, compressible filler board, in 
accordance with the provisions of IS EN 622, Part 1 to Part 4, 
wrapped  in plastic sheeting having a composition in accordance 
with BS 6076, shall be provided for protection between the 
concrete and the polyethylene pipe .    
Section 4.10  Amended as follows:  
- The 1st paragraph is amended to nominate IS EN 1610 for 
pressure t esting of gravity sewers in addition to IS EN 752.  
- The 3rd paragraph is amended to describe in greater detail the 
air test requirements for gravity sewer systems, in particular LA 
or LC test requirements.  
- The 5th paragraph is amended to describe the requ irements for 
water test and stage testing for steep graded sewer systems.  
- The 6th paragraph is amended to outline the water test 
procedure and the test acceptance criteria.  
- The 7th paragraph outlines that manhole infiltration and 
exfiltration tests are to be carried out and the proportion of 
manholes tested will be at the discretion of the IW Field 
Engineer.  
- The 8th paragraph has been amended to indicate that the water IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
187 
 level is to be to the underside of the roof slab rather than to 
ground level .  
- The 9th paragraph is amended to outline the test procedures 
and acceptance criteria for manhole infiltration tests.  
- The 10th paragraph has been amended to outline requirements 
for disposal  of water following testing of manholes and 
pipelines.  
- The 11th paragraph outlines test criteria relating to testing of 
pipes and accessories that will not vest in Irish water.  
- The last paragraph is amended to outline requirements for 
undertaking dye sur veys to check for misconnections.    
Section 4.1 1  Amended as follows:  
- Section 4.11.1  has been amended to indicate that pressure 
testing is to be carried out in the presence of Irish Water’s field 
engineer or agent.  
- Section 4.11 .2 (Ductile Iron Pressure Testing) has been 
amended to outline revised criteria and settlement time  for DI 
pipe testing.  
- Section 4.11 .3 (Polyethylene Pipe Pressure Testing) has been 
amended to outline revised criteria for PE pipe testing.   
Section 4.12  Amended as follows:  
- The 1st paragraph is expanded to outline the requirement for the 
provision of the private side inspection chamber, in accordance 
with Section 3.11.14 of the Code of Practice.  
- The 3rd paragraph and been amended to outline that the vertical 
angle between the service connecting pipe and the horizontal 
shall be between 30° degrees and 90°.   
- The 4th paragraph has been amended to indicate that where a 
connection is being made to a Sewer wit h a nominal internal 
diameter of 300mm diameter or less, connections is to be made 
using 45° angle Y branch junctions.  
- The 5th paragraph ahd been amended to indicate that 
retrospective connections made with junction fittings are to  be 
made by cutting the existing pipe, inserting the junction fitting, 
and jointing with flexible repair couplings or slip couplers.  
- The 6th paragraph is amended in relation to the connection to a 
Sewer with an internal diameter greater than 300mm  and the 
requirement for long rad ius bends.    
- A new 8th paragraph is included to outline criteria for the use of 
90o branch or saddle connections.  
- The last paragraph is amended to outline the criteria in respect 
of providing bends in the wastewater service connection.  
Part 5  
(General 
amend ment)  Part 5 describes requirements for Wastewater Pump Station. 
Previously, this Part included “should” when describing the 
requirement to comply. The word “shall” has now been included 
where “should” was previously included as a general amendment IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
188 in Part 5.   
Section  5.1 The 2nd paragraph ha s been amended to indicate that Part 5 
describes requirements for pump stations up to 20kW installed 
power.    
Section 5.2 Amended as follows: 
-The 4th paragraph  has been amended to include requirement for
interim provisions for remote monitoring of the asset.
-The 7th paragraph has been amended to outline requirements
for vesting of the pump station in Irish Water and how the
associated site will be covered by the Deed of Grant of
Easement w ith the access covered by a Right of Way
Agreement.
-The 8th paragraph has been amended to outline that emergency
storage volumes are now to be in accordance with the
requirements of Section 5.11 of the Code of practice.
-The previous last paragraph of this  Section, relating to allowing
emergency overflows from pump stations, has been omitted.
Section 5.3  Amended as follows: 
-The “specific Minimum Requirements” have been amended.
Welfare facilities and security fencing are no longer required at
pump statio ns.
-Sub-section 5.3.2 included specifying the pipework shall be in
accordance with IS EN 598  with appropriate colour markings .
-Sub-section 5.3.5 included to require telemetry to be to the
requirements of Section 5.16 to Section 5.27.
-Sub-Section 5.3.7 requires the provision of self cleansing wash
down facilities in the storage tank.
-Sub-section 5.3.8 expanded to require access for vacuum
tanker vehicles.
-A new Sub -Section 5.3. 9 is included to require a dedicated,
metered, power suppl y to be provided to the pump station
serving only the pump station equipment and associated plant
-A new Sub -Section 5.3.10 is included to require the pump
station to be made ready to facilitate the installation of telemetry
plant for data reporting to Iris h Water central facility .
-Sub-Section 5.3.12 has been amended in relation to the f low
metering facilities , which is now required to be provided on the
Rising Main as appropriate , complete with meter chamber,
isolating sluice valves, etc.
-Sub-Section 5.3. 13 has been expanded to require the odour
control equipment to be provided to eliminate the risk of odour
nuisance arising , comprising a vent -column, complete with
passive odour control .
-Sub-section 5.3.14 expanded to require lifting equipment to be
in accordance with Section 5.30.
-A new Sub -section 5.3.17 is included to indicate that safeIW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
189 access is to be provided to all components for operating, 
maintaining and possible future replacemen t,. 
-A new Sub -section 5.3.18 is included to indicate that safe
working areas are required around all components of the
pumping station.
Section 5.4  Amended as follows: 
-Sub-section 5.4.1 expanded to include “vacuum tanker” instead
of “tanker”.
-Sub-section 5.4.2 expanded to include equipment replacement.
-Sub-section 5.4.7 is expanded to outline the location of the inlet
sewer relative to the pump delivery pipework  and that a
stainless steel baffle plate, complete with stainless steel fixings ,
is to be provided.
-Sub-section 5.4.9 is expanded to require access to be suitable
to accommodate safe sight distances.
-Sub-section 5.4.13 is included to indicate that security fencing is
not required at pump stations except in exceptional
circumstances as outlined in Section 5.6.
-The 3rd paragraph is amended to require the Developer to carry
out a GMS signal strength survey rather than a radio signal
strength survey.
-The last paragraph provides requirements for the inlet manhole
upstream of the wet wel l and the requirement to provide a hand
operated penstock.
Section 5.5  Amended as follows: 
-The 1st paragraph is amended to outline that the separation
distances relate to “habitable, commercial, industrial and mixed
use properties” . It is also expanded to require that the site layout
is to include and indicate the requisite dimensional requirements
from adjoining property boundaries, location of odour control
unit/vent stack .
-The 2nd paragraph is expanded to cover “renewal, replacement
and upgrade” acti vities as well as “maintenance” activities.
-The 3rd paragraph is expanded to cover access for “Heavy
Goods Vehicle”, such as vacuum tankers.
-The last paragraph is expanded to require a Flood Risk
Assessment to be provided with the Design Submission.
Section 5.6 Amended to indicate that fencing of pump station sites is not 
required, and will only be necessary in exceptional cases. If fencing 
is required, the preferred fence type is nominated a s palisade 
fencing and a specification for this is provided . Wire mesh fencing, 
if set as a requirement, is also specified.   
Section 5.7  Amended as follows: 
-The 1st paragraph  is expanded to indicate that the maintenance
vehicle should be capable of getting a close as possible to the
wet well chamber and that this should be achieved withoutIW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
190 
 undertaking unsafe movements.  
- The second paragraph is expanded to nominate the type of 
kerbing required around the hard -standing area.  
- The 3rd and 4th paragraphs are expanded to increase the depth 
of compacted Clause 804 material to 500mm.  
- The 5th paragraph is expanded to indicate that the hard -standing 
areas should be designed to carry he avy vehicles that access 
the site.  
- A new 6th paragraph is included setting out requirements for 
backfilling over -excavated areas that are located beneath hard -
standing areas.    
Section 5.8  Amended as follows:  
- The first paragraph has been expanded to outline requirements 
for the VSD control panel, where a VDS is provided .  
- A new 3rd paragraph is included requiring the submission of 
hydraulic calculation in the Design Submission outlined in 
Section 2.3.  
- The 4th paragraph has bee n amended in relation to the 
requirement for emergency storage at a pump station.  
- A new 5th paragraph is included which covers situations where 
balance storage may be required if there are restrictions in the 
downstream network . 
- The 6th paragraph is amende d to outline the emergency storage 
requirements are to be provided in accordance with Section 
5.11 of the Code of Practice, 10 to 24 hour storage, with 24 hour 
storage required for developments up to 250 units.  
- The last paragraph is amended to require a h ard wired level 
float switch in each pump station.   
Section 5.9  Amended as follows:  
- Sub-Section 5.9.7  has been amended to outline the minimum 
pumping requirements of 3DWF to 6DWF.  
- Sub-Section 5.9.8 has been amended to indicate that the 
minimum rising main diameter is 80mm.  
- Sub-Section 5.9.10 has been amended to require the ultrasonic 
head to be installed in an accessible location, while not 
impeding access to the wet well.   
- A new Sub -Section 5.9.11 has been included outlining the 
requirements of the ultrasonic unit.  
- A new Sub -Section 5.9.19 has been included to outline the 
requirement for statutory testing during the Defects Liability 
Period.  
- Sub-Section 5.9.29 has been exp anded to require seal leak 
protection.  
- Sub-Section 5.9.31 has been expanded to require a duplicate 
steel indicator plate to be installed in the kiosk or control 
structure, rather than in the control panel.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
191 -A new Sub -Section 5.9.32 has been included outli ning the
requirements for the provision of cables with the pump plant.
-A new Sub -Section 5.9.33 is included to require the provision of
a spare name plate for the pump in the kiosk.
Section 5.10  Amended as follows:  
-The 1st paragraph is amended to outl ine revised minimum
dimensions and to indicate that benching of the well is required.
-The 2nd paragraph is expanded to limit the maximum depth of
the wet well  to 6m and specific approval of Irish Water is
required for deeper units.
-The 3rd paragraph has been amended to outline requirements
for a combined inlet manhole upstream of the wet well chamber,
which is to include a flow control penstock.
-A new 4th paragraph is included to outline the requirements of
the overflow pipe and return pipe between the emergency
storage tank and the wet well.
-The 7th paragraph is expanded to indicate the requirement for
the submission of anti -floatation calculation in the Design
Submission.
-The 8th and 9th and 10th (new) paragraph s have been amended
to outline requirements for the design of cast in situ , pre-cast
composite  and proprietary pre -cast concrete  wet well units to
comply with IS EN 1992 – Part 3,  Design of Concrete Structures
-Part 3: (Liquid retaining and containment structures, Tightness
Class 2).
-The 1 1th paragraph has been expanded to outline a require ment
for puddle flanges in the pipework passing through the walls of
structures. In addition, the designer is to provide details of the
method of sealing pipes openings in pre -cast units.
-The 1 3th paragraph has been amended to set the minimum
rising main size as 80mm.
-A new last paragraph has been inserted  to outline  that backfill
around the wet well is to incorporate a 500mm width of Clause
808 material under any structural surrounds and a 500mm  width
of free draining around the wet well close to ground level of the
unit.
Section 5.11 Amended as follows:  
-The 1st paragraph has been amended to indicate that
emergency overflows to watercourses of Storm Sewers are not
allowed, unless specified by Irish Water.
-A new 2nd paragraph is included to address the factor of safety
of the storage structure against flotation. This also indicates the
requirement for the submission of anti -floatation calculation in
the Design Submission.
-The 3rd paragraph has bee n amended in relation to the
requirement for emergency storage at a pump station. The needIW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
192 
 for 24 hour storage of DWF has been changed for 
developments of more than 2 50 units  and a Table is now 
included outlining the storage requirements.  
- The 4th paragraph has been amended to outline requirements 
for the overflow pipe from the storage tank to t he wet well . 
- A new 6th paragraph is included to require the submission of 
appropriate consents from relevant authorities for the allowance 
of an emergency storage.  
- The 7th paragraph , outlining the requirement for aperture size 
overflow screens and requir ing compliance with the 
requirements of the “Urban Wastewater Treatment Directive 
Procedures and Criteria in relation to Storm Water Overflows ”, 
as published by the Department of Environment , has been 
expanded to provide the date of this publication.  
- New paragraphs ( 8th to 12th) have been included to outline 
requirements for the construction of the emergency storage tank  
and particularly compliance with IS EN 1992 – Part 3,  Design of 
Concrete Structures - Part 3: (Liquid retaining and containment 
structure s, Tightness Class 2) and requirements for sealing the 
pipework passing through the walls of structures. In addition, the 
designer is to provide details of the method of sealing pipes 
openings in pre -cast units .  
- A new last paragraph has been inserted  to outline  that backfill 
around the wet well is to incorporate a 500mm width of Clause 
808 material under any structural surrounds and a 500mm width 
of free draining around the wet well close to ground level of the 
unit.    
Section 5.12  Amended as follows  
- The 1st paragraph has been amende4d to indicate that the valve 
chamber is to be sized to adequately house all equipment and 
provide adequate space for maintenance and plant 
replacement.  
- Sub-Section 5.12.1 has been expanded to outline the pipework 
required.  
- The 4th paragraph outlines the requirement for the submission of 
anti-floatation calculation in the Design Submission.  
- The 5th, 6th and 7th paragraphs have been expanded to outline 
the requirements for the structural design of the valve chamber.  
- The 9th and 10th paragraphs have been included to outline 
requirements for building in pipes in the walls of the valve 
chamber.   
- A new 11th paragraph has been inserted  to outline  that backfill 
around the wet well is to incorporate a 500mm width of Clause 
808 material under any structural surrounds and a 500mm width 
of free draining around the wet well close to ground level of the 
unit. IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
193 Section 5.13  The 1st paragraph has been amended to  require “no -flow” 
protection of the pumps and the provision of a controller for the 
meter in the kiosk. The last paragraph has been amended to 
require the provision of a valve in the meter chamber.  
Section 5.14  Amended as follows: 
-The 1st and 2nd parag raphs are amended to require the roof of
chambers to be flush with the surrounding finished ground level.
The 1st paragraph also includes additional requirements in
relation to flush mounting of chamber covers in pre -cast
concrete roof slabs.
-Sub-Section 5.14.2 has been amended to outline that the
covers are to be fabricate in durbar plate  and outline s the
thickness of galvanising for the covers.
-A new Sub -Section 5.14.3 is included to outline that the covers
can be single or multi leafed.
-A new Sub -Secti on 5.14.4 is included to outline that the covers
are to be provided with seals.
-Sub-Section 5.14.8 is included to indicate that the cover is to
include a recessed facility securing the cover with a n approved
padlock.
-Sub-Section 5.14.9 outlines that securi ty rating of the lock.
-Sub-Section 5.14.10 outlies that the padlock recess is to have a
cover plate.
-Sub-Section 5.14.11 outlines that the cover leaf is to incorporate
a safety stay.
-Sub-Section 5.14.12 outlines that requirement for a torsion
spring assi sted lifting system.
-Sub-Section 5.14.13 requires that the hinges and lift assistance
sets should not impinge on the safe entry of the chamber.
-Sub-Section 5.14.14  outlines requirements for the fall protection
grid.
-Sub-Section 5.14.15 outlines that the covers should be capable
of withstanding an imposed load of 6 tonne.
-A new Sub -Section 5.14.18 has been included outlining that
segmental units will be required for large openings.
-A new Sub -Section 5.14.19 is included outlining the
requirements for supp ort beams for segmental units.
-A new 4th paragraph is include d outlining the requirements for
meter chamber access covers.
-The last paragraph has been amended to outline that
proprietary rungs are required in meter chambers and valve
chambers less than 3.0m deep and ladders are required for
deeper chambers.
Section 5.15  An amendment has been included to require the emergency 
storage tank to be vented along with the wet well structure.  It has 
also been expanded to cover mechanical ventilation of the units .  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2  – 2020)  
 
194 
 Section 5.16  This Section has been retitled “General Electrical Requirements” 
and has been expanded to outline general electrical requirements.  
Section 5.17  A new Section 5.17 “Cables” has been included outlining the 
requirements for electric al cables.  
Section 5.18  A new Section 5.18 “Cables Installation” has been included 
outlining the requirements for electrical cable installation.  
Section 5.19  A new Section 5.19 “Control Panel General Requirements” has 
been included outlining the requir ements for pump control panels.  
Section 5.20  A new Section 5.20  “Form 4 Control Panel  Components - 
Additional  Requirements” has been included outlining the 
requirements for Form 4 pump control panels.  
Section 5.21  A new Section 5.21 is included outlining requirements for earthing 
and bonding.  
Section 5.22  Previously Section 5.17, the retitled Section 5.22 , it has been 
amended as follows:  
- The 1st paragraph as been amended to indicate that a separate 
power supply k iosk will be to the power supplier requirements.  
- The 2nd paragraph is amended to include revised dimensions for 
the control kiosks.  
- The 5th paragraph is amended to outline the minimum thickness 
of the plate for the fabrication of kiosks is reduced to 3mm  from 
4mm.  
- The 9th paragraph has been amended to outline the 
requirements for security rating of the kiosk doors.  
- The 12th paragraph has been amended to outline that where 
additional security is required or where specified in the Planning 
approval, a str ucture to house the control panels and associated 
equipment shall be provided.  
Section 5.23  A new Section 5.23 is included outlining the control philosophy for 
pump stations.  
Section 5.24  A new Section 5.24 is included to outline the requirements for 
abnormal operation for pump stations.  
Section 5.25  A new Section 5.25 is included to outline the testing requirements 
for pump stations.  
Section 5.26  A new Section 5.26 is included to outline the requirements for 
telemetry signalling for pump stations.  
Section 5.27  A new Section 5.27 is included to outline the requirements for dial 
out alarms at pump stations.  
Section 5.28  Previously Section 5.18, the retitled Section 5.28 has been 
amended as follows:  
- The 1st paragraph has been amended to indicate that the 
chamber shall be fully sealed.  
- A new 3rd paragraph is included to outline the requirement of 
pre-cast concrete meter chambers units.  
- The 7th paragraph has been expanded to include the provision 
of sealed c over unit for the chamber.  IW-CDS-5030-03 (Revision 2 – 2020 ) 
195 -The 8th paragraph has been amended to describe the revised
requirements for the bedding and seating of the frames and for
the bedding of the brickwork under the frames.
Section 5.29  Previously Section 5.19, the retitled Section 5.29 has been 
amended as follows:  
-The 1st paragraph has been amended to outline the requirement
that ducting is to be in accordance with IS EN 61386 -24. In
addition ducts used for ESB Networks cables are to be  in
accordance with ESB Networks specification 16113 and IS 370
colour code .
-A new 3rd paragraph has been added to indicate that the lowest
positioned chamber is to incorporate a drain to a soak away. In
addition the duct or duct banks shall be located 150 mm above
the floor level of the duct chamber.
-A new 5th paragraph is provided to set out the requirements for
the provision of ducts.
-The 8th paragraph has been amended to describe the revised
requirements for the bedding and seating of the frames and for
the bedding of the brickwork under the frames .
-The 9th paragraph has been amended to outline that the plinth
for chambers on grassed areas is to have a bull -nosed edge
finish.
Section 5.30 Previously Section 5.20, the retitled Section 5.30 has been 
amended to require the provision of a lifting davit socket rather 
than a davit and socket. The last paragraph has bene amended to 
outline that consultation with Irish Water is required in relation to 
the provision of permanent lifting equipment. Where such 
permanent lifting equipment is provided, fencing of the site is 
required.   
Section 5.31  Previously Section 5.21, the retitled Section 5.31 has been 
amended to omit the need for a separate wash down area.  
Section 5.32  A new Section is included to outline the testing requirements for 
liquid retaining structures.  
Appendix A Additional Standards referred to in the Code of Practice, Revision 
2, are included in Appendix A.   
Previous  
Appendix B The previous Appendix B , titled  “Selection of Typical Details” , has 
been omitted   
Appendix B Previously Appendix C, Appendix B,  “Gravity Sewer Design ” has 
been included outlining revised design requirements for design. . 
Appendix C The previous Appendix D – Wastewater Flow Rates for Design – 
has been included  as Appendix C .  
Appendix D New Appendix D - List of Amendments Associated with Revision 2 
has been included.  